FXUS63 KLOT 212348
AFDLOT

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Chicago/Romeoville, IL
648 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SHORT TERM...
Issued at 152 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Through Saturday night...

No impactful weather is expected during the short term period. 

Our area is enjoying a gorgeous fall day with sunny skies, low 
humidity levels, and temperatures in the mid to upper 70s. Perhaps 
the only thing keeping today from being perfect are gusty southwest 
winds, though it feels wrong to complain anytime temperatures are
15 degrees above normal this time of year. 

With upper-level troughing gradually developing across the western 
United States, the Great Lakes will remain within broad low- to 
upper-level southwesterly flow offering a continuation of beautiful 
fall weather. Tonight will be seasonably mild with overnight lows in 
the upper 40s to lower 50s. Tomorrow looks like a spitting image of 
today, except a few degrees warmer given modestly warmer 850mb 
temperatures. In collaboration with neighboring offices, we opted to 
aggressively advertise highs hitting the 80 degree mark across much 
of the area tomorrow afternoon even though boundary layer moisture 
will gradually tick upward (e.g. slows the warming process 
especially this time of year with fewer hours of daylight). Looking 
back at climate records, Chicago and Rockford have only hit 80 
a handful of times after any given October 21st. So, history is 
not on our side. Regardless if Chicago or Rockford tag 80, it'll 
still be a wonderfully warm and sunny October day. 

Borchardt

&&

.LONG TERM...
Issued at 202 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Sunday through Friday...

Strong southerly flow will continue Sunday morning ahead of a 
surface low located over the central Great Plains. 850 hPa 
temperatures, which normally are around 6C in late October, are 
forecast to be around 16C Sunday afternoon, so expect continued warm 
temperatures Sunday, with highs in the mid to upper 70s, versus the 
norm of around 60F. Cloud cover will increase late Sunday afternoon 
as high cirrus moves overhead, with increasing mid-level clouds 
Sunday night as a weather system approaches. 

A closed upper low is forecast to track from the central Rockies 
northeast to the northeastern Great Plains Sunday, with decent 
isentropic ascent ahead of it. Models have continued to show a 
signal for a chance of rain showers Sunday night into early Monday 
morning, with better chances the further north and west you go. 
Although it is only a slight chance, a thunderstorm or two may 
develop Sunday overnight. The chance for showers will decrease 
slightly Monday morning as the upper low moves into Canada, but with 
continued strong southerly flow and isentropic ascent, a chance for 
a few showers cannot be ruled out throughout Monday. The same strong 
southerly flow should keep us warm Monday, with lows Monday morning 
closer to seasonal high temperatures, and highs remaining the mid to 
upper 70s, despite cloud cover and possible precipitation.

Another upper low with associated surface low is expected to move 
into the region, as models continue to display a spread on the 
timing and the track of this system. Some bring in rain as early as 
Tuesday afternoon, with others later into Tuesday night. Overall 
trend for the best chance for rain is Tuesday overnight. Off and on 
rain may linger during the day Wednesday, with chances decreasing in 
the afternoon. As the surface/upper low moves east, winds will 
become more northerly and cooler temperatures should move in with 
this system, with 850 hPa temperatures dropping down to 10C. High 
temperatures will range from the low 60s to the north, to around 70 
further south, although the timing and track of the system makes 
temperature forecasts challenging. Similarly, when the precipitation 
will end is questionable, but generally the chances for rain should
end by Wednesday night.

With cooler air moving in towards the end of next week, temperatures 
are expected to fall to more seasonal norms, with highs in the mid 
to upper 50s, and lows of around 40F, except a bit warmer in the 
Chicago metro. Some models indicate another surface low in the 
central Great Plains by the end of next week, our next possible 
weather maker, but being a week away, a lot can change with this 
system.

BKL

&&

.AVIATION...
For the 00Z TAFs...

Winds have eased from our peak of gusts near 30 kt mid afternoon.
Occasional SSW gusts to around 20 kt remain possible through the 
rest of the evening and early overnight hours thanks to a stout 
low-level jet increasing overhead to 45 kt at 1000-1500 ft. Given
the somewhat sporadic nature of the gusts this will create 
marginal low-level wind shear (LLWS) concerns through at least 
9Z. It is possible this persists a bit later through 12Z but will 
assess this potential with later updates. Surface winds then 
pick back up again out of the south by late morning with gusts 
back in the mid 20kt range expected during the afternoon. It is 
possible we see another period of marginal LLWS Saturday evening 
depending on how quickly gusts ease after sunset.

Petr

&&

.LOT WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IL...None.
IN...None.
LM...Small Craft Advisory...nearshore waters until midnight Saturday.

     Small Craft Advisory...LMZ740-LMZ741-LMZ742-LMZ743-LMZ744-
     LMZ745...9 AM Saturday to 7 PM Saturday.

&&

$$

Visit us at weather.gov/chicago

Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube at:
www.facebook.com/NWSChicago
www.twitter.com/NWSChicago
www.youtube.com/NWSChicago
