FXUS63 KILX 220049
AFDILX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Lincoln IL
749 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Issued at 231 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Well above normal temperatures and breezy southerly flow will 
continue through Monday. High temperatures on Saturday will be near 
80 degrees. The strongest wind gusts are expected on Sunday, with 
afternoon gusts around 35 mph. Isolated showers or thunderstorms are 
possible north of I-72 late Sunday night, then a better chance of
showers arrives Monday evening into Tuesday.

&&

.UPDATE...
Issued at 747 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

This evening, a trough of low pressure stretches from Lake
Superior back into western Kansas with a tight southwesterly
pressure gradient in place across central Illinois. This will keep
winds breezy overnight with a few sporadic gusts around 20 mph or
so possible through the night. Temps are on track to fall into the
lower to mid 50s.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Saturday)
ISSUED AT 231 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

It's a pleasant mid-October afternoon across central IL, as
abundant sunshine and persistent, breezy southwest winds have 
boosted temps into the upper 70s. The large scale sfc pattern has 
not changed much since this morning, with a sfc ridge over the 
eastern seaboard, a strong low pressure system over northern 
Canada, and its associated cold front extending southward through 
the upper Midwest into central IA. Wind gusts will weaken after 
sunset, but occasional gusts to 20 mph will remain possible 
through the night. It will be a mild night by October standards, 
with lows in the low to mid 50s.

A strong trough located off the coast of the Pacific NW this
afternoon will dig into the western US tomorrow, and play a large 
role in dictating the weather across the CONUS through mid-week. 
In advance of this system, the weather will be little changed 
tomorrow. Breezy flow will shift slightly and be out of the south 
instead of the southwest, and daytime gusts again approaching 30 
mph. Unseasonable warmth continues, with 850mb temps in the +16 to
+17C range. With another day of mostly sunny skies and southerly 
flow, sfc temps are expected to climb a few more degrees. The 
blended guidance has consistently been too cool over the last few 
days, so trended towards the 75th percentile for max temp 
tomorrow, resulting in forecast highs in the low 80s, which is 
about 15 degrees above normal.

.LONG TERM...(Saturday night through Friday)
ISSUED AT 231 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

The focus of the long term forecast period is almost entirely on
the evolution of the long wave trough that will be positioned 
over the western US by Sat night. As that trough continues to 
deepen, an impactful low pressure system will develop over the 
Heartland. The trough evolves as two waves, one ejecting first and
lifting through the northern Plains along with an associated 
strong mid-latitude cyclone, then the other wave forms a closed 
low over the southern Plains that then lifts through the Ohio 
Valley around mid-week with another sfc low pressure system. While
neither of these systems are expected to bring major impacts to 
the local area, it will still be some of the more impactful 
weather we've had in awhile, and there are several forecast topics
to touch on, from anomalous temperatures and strong synoptic 
winds, to rainfall amounts and timing. 

Sunday is expected to be the windiest day of the weekend, as sfc
pressure falls in the lee of the Rockies further tighten the sfc 
pressure gradient across the US and lead to robust southerly winds
across the Midwest. Probabilistic guidance suggests sustained 
winds have a 50% chance of exceeding 25 mph, as do wind gusts of 
exceeding 40 mph. Both the GFS/ECMWF ensemble mean have wind gusts
of 35 mph, and forecast soundings certainly support gusts of 35+ 
mph mixing down. It's worth noting that very few ensemble members 
have wind gusts exceeding wind advisory criteria (gusts of 45 
mph), and we typically do not exceed wind gust guidance in WAA 
regimes. Strong southerly winds are also expected on Monday, 
although likely trending a tad weaker than Sunday. 

The persistent southerly flow will keep temps well above average
into early next week, with highs pushing to near or possibly above
80F Sun and Mon, which is 15-20 degrees above normal. It still 
appears temps will remain a few degrees shy of record highs, which
are in the 83-87F range for Sun and Mon. (The exception is 
Peoria, which has a record high of 81F on Mon, Oct 24). The low 
temps Sun night will be similar to the normal high temps for this 
time of year, around 60F, and those values could approach record 
warm low temps.

Precip arrival time continues to trend later with this system. The
earliest chance of precip will be Sun night, as a secondary warm 
front/area of low-level WAA lift north through the area. This 
could produce a few scattered showers, and with a few hundred J/kg
of MUCAPE a few rumbles of thunder are also possible. But 
widespread precip is unlikely. Then on Mon, the cold front is 
expected to remain west of the CWA, resulting in dry conditions 
through much, if not all, of the day. Finally, that cold front 
starts to push into the area from west to east Mon evening, 
bringing rain chances with it. Rain chances continue as the 
aforementioned second wave lifting out of the southern Plains 
pushes into the area late Tues eve into Wed. In terms of total 
rainfall amounts, there remains a fairly wide range of outcomes 
among the available guidance. The current signal is for slightly 
higher amounts in the western half of the CWA (ensemble mean 
approaching or exceeding 1"), with slightly lower amounts in the 
eastern half of the CWA (ensemble mean around 0.75"). All signs 
continue to point to very weak instability for Mon night and 
beyond, so while a stray rumble of thunder can't be ruled out, 
organized severe weather is unlikely. And with dry antecedent 
conditions, even 1-2" of rainfall is unlikely to lead to any 
flooding problems unless rainfall rates are excessively high, 
which also seems unlikely with the lack of instability. 

Looking beyond mid-week, there don't appear to be any significant
cold blasts on the way. The NBM 25th-75th percentile has lows 
falling between the mid-30s and mid-40s from Wed through next 
week, which is near normal (40F). Highs also look seasonable, in 
the mid 50s to low 60s. Models suggest another wave sweeping 
through the central Plains late next week into the weekend, 
potentially providing additional precip chances, contingent upon 
the track of the low.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 644 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Breezy south winds and VFR conditions are expected across central
Illinois through Saturday. Gusts will taper off overnight, but
winds remain strong aloft...around 40 kt at 020. This will be
close to but just shy of reaching LLWS criteria assuming surface
gusts stay just above 10 kt. Winds will begin mixing down again
mid to late Saturday morning with gusts in the 20-25 kt range
during the afternoon.


&&

.ILX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NONE.
&&

$$

UPDATE...Deubelbeiss
SYNOPSIS...Erwin
SHORT TERM...Erwin
LONG TERM...Erwin
AVIATION...Deubelbeiss
