FXUS65 KLKN 220021
AFDLKN

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Elko NV
521 PM PDT Fri Oct 21 2022

SYNOPSIS...A weather system will impact the silver state on
Saturday ending the long stretch of fair and warm days. This
system will cause widespread showers across the state with both
rain and some snow. This marks the first system with winter
weather for this winter season. 

SHORT TERM...Today through Sunday.

A frontal system will impact the silver state through the weekend
bringing the first taste of winter weather. This system will drag
a cold front across the silver state early Saturday morning
through late Saturday evening. This front will be the focus of the
showers with the heaviest showers along the front itself. There
will be showers both ahead and behind the frontal band but these
will be weaker. The showers will start off as mostly rain with
this system but will then transition to snow once the colder air
arrives late afternoon to early evening Saturday. This will see
the snow gradually creep down the mountain side before finally
occurring in the valleys. The amount of liquid (both rain and 
snow water equivalent) is most likely going to be between 0.25" to
0.5" for the valleys with 0.35" being the average. The mountains 
will receive higher amounts between 0.5" and 1.0" with the 
average of 0.75" for northern ranges and 0.6" for east central 
ranges. Snow amounts for the valleys will likely be low as this 
will occur at the tail end of the system with a dusting up to 0.1"
being most likely. The exception is the high valleys near Jarbidge
which can see up to a couple of inches. The mountains will see 
the majority of the snowfall with the heaviest hit ranges of 
Jarbidge, Rubies, Snake, and Creek seeing 5 to 10 in of snow. The 
rest of the ranges will see less snowfall of 1 to 5 in. The
expected impacts from so much snow for the first winter system
prompted a Winter Weather Advisory for northern Elko county and
the Rubies for Saturday afternoon and evening. Winds will be 
gusty with this system with gusts mostly in the 20s and 30s mph 
range, however an occasional gusts may be stronger in the 40s mph 
range. Lastly this system will bring an end to the warm 
temperatures with much colder air filtering across the silver 
state. Highs will drop from the mostly 50s on Saturday to 30s and
40s for Sunday. Likewise the lows will drop hard with mins in the
teens to twenties by Sunday morning. Pockets of single digits are
also likely to occur in areas where cold air likes to pools such 
as Wild Horse. 

LONG TERM...Monday to next Friday. Shortwave ridging will quickly
give way to Pacific energy coming ashore. Current model solutions
depict strong jet energy suppressing the ridge Monday night into
Tuesday. Afternoon highs for the Monday time frame will be in the
40s and 50s, which will be below normal for this time of year.
Model solutions are showing partly to mostly sunny skies with some
afternoon breezes. The aforementioned energy is expected to bring
light rain and snow showers to locales north of the I-80 corridor.
Overnight lows will be in the 20s and 30s.

By Tuesday, another area of low pressure will be diving from the
Pacific Northwest. Some light shower activity is expected on
Tuesday with light amounts anticipated. Highs will be in the 50s
with afternoon breezy west winds. The upper level system is 
forecast to dig south and east through Tuesday night and 
Wednesday. The low pressure system is expected to bring in a 
reinforcing shot of cold air along with a chance for light snow 
showers. Lows will be in the 20s to around 30.

Thursday and Friday, there is a possibility of quieter weather for
the area. Highs will be in the 40s and 50s with lows in the 20s 
and 30s.

AVIATION...Clouds will continue to lower during the overnight
hours with wind speeds staying up overnight. By Saturday morning,
expect -SHRA developing across the northern TAF sites (KWMC-KBAM-
KEKO) after 09Z tonight with the passage of a cold front. 
CIGS/VSBY are expect to drop to IFR/LIFR conditions in the heavier
shower activity. The unsettled weather will move towards KELY and
affect that site with -SHRA after 20Z Saturday.

FIRE WEATHER...A weather system will impact all fire zones over
the next few days. Ahead of this system, in northern NV, the 
winds are gusting into the 30s mpg range while the RH is still 
low in with min RH in the teens. Thus a Red Flag Warning remains 
in effect 11 pm. The system will then arrive in force early
Saturday starting in the northern zones and spreading south. This
will cause rain and snow showers along with far higher RH. Winds
will remain gusty but not critical fire weather conditions area
expected with the system as it is moist. While remote a few
isolated thunderstorms can occur in far northern NV on Saturday
afternoon to evening. 

&&

.LKN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Red Flag Warning until 11 PM PDT this evening for Central Elko 
County-Eastern Elko County-Humboldt County-Quinn-Southeastern 
Humboldt County and northern Lander County-W Elko County, N 
Eureka and Lander Counties N of I80.

Wind Advisory until noon PDT Saturday for Humboldt County-
Northern Elko County-Northern Lander County and Northern Eureka 
County-South Central Elko County-Southwest Elko County.

Winter Weather Advisory from 1 PM Saturday to 11 AM PDT Sunday 
for Northern Elko County-Ruby Mountains and East Humboldt Range.

Wind Advisory until 5 PM PDT Saturday for White Pine County.

&&

$$

99/99
