FXUS65 KTFX 232056
AFDTFX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Great Falls MT
256 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...

Snow diminishes from west to east through this evening as the 
responsible storm system exits the region. Partial clearing 
tonight will allow lows to fall into the teens for most locations.
Slightly milder and unsettled conditions are expected for much of
next week, with periods of gusty winds and mostly mountain snow 
showers.

&&

.DISCUSSION...

Remainder of this afternoon and tonight...A brisk northerly flow 
aloft continues this afternoon as the upper level low responsible 
for the wintry conditions moves off to the east. Cold air 
advection in conjunction with lingering snowfall/thick cloud cover
has held temperatures pretty close to this morning's lows despite
that we are in the traditional time for peak diurnal heating. 
This has resulted in lingering impacts to transportation, outdoor 
recreation, and power infrastructure. The snow has been slow to 
tapper off and will likely persist longer into the evening hours, 
likely outlasting the expiration time for the current winter 
weather products in place. In light of this, I have extended 
advisories/warnings for our eastern zones through 24/06Z. Most of 
the other products were left untouched, with the exception of 
zones 319 (Helena Valley), 320 (Canyon Ferry Lake area), and 328 
(Dillon area), which were canned early due to little to no 
snowfall occurring. 

Snow is still expected to diminish in a west to east fashion, 
likely clearing out of central and western areas by this evening, 
and eastern areas by midnight. Then partial clearing will take 
place as temperatures cool to the coldest levels so far this 
season, mostly tens and lower 20s. This means that any left over 
wet surfaces can be expected to freeze over, possibly causing 
slippery spots to develop on area roadways/sidewalks. In addition 
to that, patchy fog may develop over locations that happen to 
clear out, though confidence in widespread impacts is low due to 
at least some clouds remaining in place through the morning hours.

Monday through Tuesday night...After a cold Monday morning, 
temperatures moderate some as a fast moving disturbance approaches
the Northern Rockies. Increased westerly flow aloft will quickly 
elevate surface winds for most locations, but most notably along 
the Rocky Mountain Front and the immediate adjacent plains. NAEFs 
projected mean H700 wind speed continues to run about 2 to 3 
standard deviations above climatology late Monday afternoon 
through early Tuesday, with most plains locations likely to 
observe gusts in the 30 to 45 mph range. The exception will be 
along the Rocky Mountain Front and adjoining plains, where there 
is a about 50 to 70 percent chance of gusts exceeding 55 mph. 
Winds may increase again on Tuesday, but slightly weaker flow 
aloft and from a more northwesterly direction will likely 
translate into less higher end gusts. There will also be a round 
of mostly mountain snow showers Monday night and Tuesday, mostly 
impacting the immediate eastern slopes along the Continental 
Divide and the higher terrain of the southwest, where there is a 
70 percent chance for an inch or more of snow. 

Wednesday through Friday...Another system moves in late Wednesday
into Thursday and looks to be quickly followed by a period of 
stronger zonal flow late Thursday into Friday. Some light snow 
will be possible for the far southwestern mountains Wednesday 
afternoon/evening and gusty westerly winds are expected for the 
Rocky Mountain Front and the plains late Thursday into Friday. As 
of right now, the chances for high wind criteria gusts look to be 
confined to the Rocky Mountain Front, but some deterministic 
models suggest strong lee side troughing and a tightening pressure
Thursday into early Friday, possibly leading to bursts of 
stronger wind gusts over the plains as well. The moist westerly 
flow aloft may also increase snow chances in the East 
Glacier/Marias Pass area Thursday night into Friday. 

Next weekend...Most ensembles bring weak ridging for the weekend,
possibly being interrupted by a passing weak disturbance late 
Saturday/early Sunday. This will likely result in drier and breezy
conditions and seasonable temperatures. Looking ahead, about half
of the ensembles bring a trough over the Northern Rockies late 
Sunday into early next week, but there are equal chances for weak 
ridging as well. The NBM handles this well with a slight increase 
in pops and winds Sunday afternoon. -RCG

&&

.AVIATION...
1140 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022 (23/18Z TAF period)

Snow will begin to diminish in a northwest to southeast fashion 
through this evening, along with IFR/LIFR conditions gradually 
trending toward MVFR and above. Partial clearing is expected 
tonight, but MVFR clouds will persist for much of the night, 
particularly in the eastern portions of North-central/Southwest MT 
and near higher terrain. Lighter winds and abundant surface moisture 
will encourage patchy fog development over locations that happen to 
clear out, but confidence is low for impacts at any particular 
terminal. Drier conditions are expected on Monday as southwesterly 
winds increase ahead of an approaching shortwave disturbance. -RCG 

KWYS TAF will not be issued again until airport operations resume 
next spring.

Refer to weather.gov/zlc for more detailed regional aviation weather 
and hazard information.

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
GTF  19  42  30  46 /  10  10  10   0 
CTB  15  39  29  43 /  20  20  20  10 
HLN  19  47  33  46 /  20  10  50  10 
BZN  15  44  28  44 /  30  10  70  10 
WYS   3  34  18  37 /  20  10  90  30 
DLN  15  42  24  42 /  30  10  40   0 
HVR  17  42  28  47 /  30  10   0   0 
LWT  20  42  30  43 /  80  10  10   0 

&&

.TFX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...

WINTER STORM WARNING IN EFFECT UNTIL 12 AM MDT MONDAY FOR 
MOUNTAIN ZONES AND SOME NORTH-CENTRAL LOWER ELEVATIONS.

WINTER WEATHER ADVISORY IN EFFECT UNTIL 12 AM MDT MONDAY FOR 
PLAINS and VALLEY ZONES.

&&

$$

http://www.weather.gov/greatfalls
