FXUS65 KGGW 232103
AFDGGW

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Glasgow MT
303 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.DISCUSSION...

First winter storm of the season is upon us with a direct hit
through Northeast Montana. The unusual case of temperatures
falling throughout the day has allowed rain to mix with or change
over to snow for many locations near and west of MT Highway 24.
The remainder of our CWA east of MT-Highway 24 should see the
change to snow early this evening.

Higher elevation areas will see more accumulation while lower
elevation areas will see less. More persistent snowfall has
already begun accumulating on roadways, and non-road areas are
seeing more.

Current Winter Storm Warning and Winter Weather Advisory still
holding good. 

By Monday afternoon this storm will move eastward into the
Dakotas.

Tuesday and beyond expect a dry weather pattern with multiple dry
cold front moving through the area.    ---BMickelson

&&

.AVIATION...

LAST UPDATED: 1525Z

FLIGHT CAT RANGE: MVFR - LIFR

DISCUSSION: Expect rain changing over to snow today at KGGW and 
KOLF, then tonight for KSDY and KGDV. The combination of the 
increasing wind and snowfall will drive visibilities to LIFR at 
less than 1 mile at times. Slow improving conditions are expected 
roughly Monday mid-morning with VFR across the board not 
anticipated till about 21Z in the afternoon. 

WIND: East to east northeast 10 to 15 knots through the morning. 
Turning from the north this afternoon and increasing to 25-35 
kts. Then, backing to the northwest and decreasing to 10 to 20 kts
after 12Z Monday morning.

GAH/BMickelson


&&

.GLASGOW WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Weather Advisory until midnight MDT tonight for Central 
and Southeast Phillips...Central and Southern Valley...
Petroleum. 

Winter Storm Warning until noon MDT Monday for Daniels. 

Winter Weather Advisory until noon MDT Monday for Dawson...
Eastern Roosevelt...Garfield...McCone...Prairie...Richland...
Sheridan...Western Roosevelt...Wibaux. 

Winter Storm Warning until midnight MDT tonight for Northern 
Phillips...Northern Valley...Southwest Phillips. 

&&

$$

weather.gov/glasgow
