FXUS65 KMSO 232044
AFDMSO

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Missoula MT
244 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.DISCUSSION...A winter-esque pattern will continue through at
least Wednesday night. Today, though, a few remaining showers are
expected during the afternoon, especially in the higher terrain 
and along the Continental Divide from Rogers Pass and south. In 
fact, the only areas we expect continued travel concerns will be 
MacDonald and Homestake passes in heavier showers, and 
Philipsburg through Georgetown Lake. 

With partial clearing in many locations, tonight will be the 
coldest night of this season for many. The potential for wet 
roads, sidewalks, and especially elevated surfaces to freeze over
will exist in southwest Montana, exercise caution if traveling 
tonight.

The next system begins tomorrow around noon in north-central 
Idaho and quickly spreads into Western Montana. The cold morning 
temperatures and early start in Idaho will allow for snow at the 
start down to 3000 feet, with little to no accumulations on paved 
surfaces until after dark. Warm air will then push north aloft and
change snow to rain below 4000 to 4500 feet until after sunset, 
when snow levels once again lower to around 3500 feet. The main 
difference in Montana will be a later initiation and precipitation
will start as snow above 4000 until after dark when snow levels 
lower to 3500 feet. 

Once again, the highest impacts will be for back country
enthusiasts and pass level and higher roads. If you are heading
out into the back country, please plan accordingly. 

The Wednesday system will be the coldest of our first 3 system and
should be all snow above 2500 feet. North-central Idaho will again
be the focus of the best precipitation and another round of 
winter highlights may be necessary. In Montana, the system loses 
organization and lighter precipitation is expected, with the 
potential of a trace in the valleys and 1 to 3 inches in the 
mountains. 

A brief high pressure ridge is expected to move over the Northern
Rockies to end the week and teens for overnight lows are forecast. 
We are monitoring the evolution of a potential late weekend 
system, please keep checking subsequent forecasts. 


&&

.AVIATION...Clearing has initiated in far northwest Montana but
for most area terminals ceilings are low and at times will be
lower than VFR. Showers will continue in southwest Montana this 
afternoon and be heavy at times. KBTM between 23/2100 and 24/0200z
could have visibilities of 1 to 3 miles in heavier showers. 
Monday, with sufficient clearing both KGPI and KMSO will have 
freezing fog from 24/0900 until 24/1500z. Another round of 
precipitation is expected on Monday, causing terrain obscurations 
above 4000 feet and reduced visibility at area terminals in 
heavier showers. 



&&

.MSO WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MT...Winter Weather Advisory from 3 PM Monday to noon MDT Tuesday for 
     Potomac/Seeley Lake Region...West Glacier Region. 

     Winter Weather Advisory from 3 PM Monday to noon MDT Tuesday for 
     Bitterroot/Sapphire Mountains. 

     Winter Storm Warning until 6 PM MDT this evening for 
     Butte/Blackfoot Region. 

ID...Winter Weather Advisory from 11 AM Monday to 8 AM PDT Tuesday 
     for Northern Clearwater Mountains...Southern Clearwater 
     Mountains. 

&&

$$
