FXUS63 KMPX 220246
AFDMPX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Twin Cities/Chanhassen MN
946 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.DISCUSSION...(This evening through Friday)
Issued at 234 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

KEY MESSAGES: 

- Much above normal temperatures are expected through this 
  weekend, with elevated fire weather conditions in south/west 
  Minnesota.

- Chances for showers and even some thunderstorms along with 
  breezy winds move in late Sunday through Monday. However, 
  widespread significant rainfall is not expected.

- Dry most of next week with near normal temperatures.

TODAY THROUGH SUNDAY - A weak frontal passage in the form of a wind 
shift pushed through the region earlier this morning. Despite the 
northwesterly flow, temperatures have still managed to climb some ten
degrees above normal. With southerly flow returning ahead of the 
long awaited weekend system, highs will soar well into the 70s with 
areas of southwestern Minnesota making a run at 80 Saturday and 
Sunday. The temperature forecast seems to about the only sure thing 
heading into this weekend as there is still a great deal of 
uncertainty in regards to precipitation. The reason for the 
uncertainty is models continue to vary as to whether or not 
convection forms across the forecast area. 

It looks like clouds and light rain / drizzle will develop late 
Sunday/night. If the forcing is stronger, then we may be able to 
break through the stout 800mb capping inversion. However, with the 
best forcing trending to the northwest over the Dakotas, and best 
thermodynamic setting up to the south, areas in Minnesota and 
Wisconsin could end up seeing little if any rainfall. Confidence 
should increase once this system get closer and is in the HiRes 
models time frame. SPC still has the marginal risk across the region,
so if storms to manage to form, the could pose a risk of hail or 
damaging wind, but they should be elevated and not have a tornado 
risk.

Meanwhile, fire weather concerns will be a focus this weekend. Dew 
points will remain low Saturday, particularly across western 
Minnesota, as what moisture this system is able to pull up from the 
Gulf remains largely to the south and east of the region. Minimum RH 
bottoms out around 20% with values as low as 15% possible in 
southwestern Minnesota. Current forecast wind gusts are bordering on 
meeting Red Flag criteria. If stronger winds are able to mix down, 
fire weather headlines may be needed. Sunday should not be as much of
a concern with better moisture working its way in, though winds will
likely be stronger.

MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY - There is a chance (20-40%) for lingering 
precipitation on Monday as the cold front sweeps through the region, 
but widespread precipitation is not expected. Winds will become
westerly with gusts near 30 mph possible. Temperatures will fall
throughout the day, with highs likely occurring early in the morning.
Looking ahead, the latest trend is that the upper level pattern is 
more active to the south, which means mostly dry conditions for the 
Upper Midwest. There are still small chances for precipitation (20 to
30%) but nothing that signals appreciable rainfall. Temperatures 
will be near the seasonal average for late October, with highs near 
50. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 06Z TAFS through 06Z Saturday night)
Issued at 945 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR through the period. Light winds tonight, becoming southeast along
and north of I-94 and south south of I-94 with some gusts 20-25 kts
Saturday. 

KMSP...No concerns.

/OUTLOOK FOR KMSP/
Sat...VFR. Wind SE 10-15G20kts. 
Sun...VFR. Chc MVFR/TSRA late. Wind SE 20G35kts. 
Mon...MVFR/-SHRA likely. Wind WSW 20G35kts.

&&

.MPX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MN...None.
WI...None.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Dye/JRB
AVIATION...Borghoff
