FXUS61 KCAR 231750
AFDCAR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Caribou ME
150 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure will remain over Maine through tonight. Low
pressure off the Carolinas this morning will lift north to New
Jersey Monday and dissipate. Another low may approach the region
from the south on Wednesday. High pressure will begin to build
back into the area Thursday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
150 pm update...
Fog dissipated several hours ago with it holding on longest
along the Penobscot River. Only high cirrus deck remains,
thicker along the coast and over the outer islands. For the most
part majority of the region remains partly-mostly sunny thru
this afternoon.

Have bumped up maxes across the north where several locations
have already hit the 70 degree mark and with another hour or so
of heating, expect locations aren't quite done rising under
sunny skies.

Previous discussion:
Surface ridging will hold across Maine into tonight. Weak low 
pressure off the Carolinas this morning will slowly lift north up 
the eastern seaboard and should be near the south Jersey coast 
by 12Z Monday. Today will feature plenty of sunshine from 
Millinocket north after any early morning river valley fog. 

Temperatures will be unseasonably mild and like Saturday most 
low elevation locations will top off in the middle 60s. Along 
the coast and into interior Downeast the area is in the marine 
air and will start with stratus and fog which should dissipate 
by mid-morning. Filtered sunshine through high clouds will give 
way to a mostly cloudy sky during the afternoon. A bit of light 
rain may reach the outer islands by the end of the day.

Tonight will see an increase in clouds across the north while rain 
develops along the coast during the evening and spreads north into 
Bangor by late evening, and perhaps as far north as Millinocket by 
daybreak Monday. Patchy fog is expected Downeast, and the increasing 
clouds should limit the river valley fog potential across the north. 
lows tonight will be more uniform than recent nights with lows in 
the 40s.  An east wind will increase to 10 to 15 mph along the coast 
by morning, with light wind elsewhere.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY THROUGH TUESDAY/...
The low pressure system centered off the New England coast will
move northward on Monday. The question for the day will be the 
progression of rain into the north. The 00Z guidance shows very 
little rain to no rain north of the Central Highlands in the 
morning hours due to the very dry air from the high to the 
north. So decided to decrease the precip forecast for that area.
By the afternoon, the ECMWF is the only extended model that 
keeps rain out of the north completely, so went with the GFS and
CMC. By Monday night, the low will continue to move NNE, slowly
reducing rain across the area. Temps for both Monday and Monday
night should be above normal.

By Tuesday, some shortwave energy will feed into the exiting
low, bringing light rain and drizzle across the area. The warm
airmass with this exiting low and returning weak high should
push temps into the mid 60s. By Tuesday night, the moisture from
the shortwave will continue to bring light rain and drizzle to
the area. Expect low temps in the mid 50s.

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SATURDAY/...
Some weak shortwave energy is expected to remain in the area for
Wednesday, bringing some showers to the south. Otherwise, a
fairly warm day with highs in the upper 60s. Models show the
next system bringing rain to the area Wednesday night into
Thursday. Still significant differences among the models with
the exact track of this system, so capped pops at chance for
now. Behind this system, drier conditions and more seasonable
temperatures are expected for the weekend.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
NEAR TERM: VFR over the Aroostook terminals next 24 hours. VFR
light rain should move into HUL toward 16z Mon afternoon.

Downeast terminals likely to see MVFR restrictions move in after
06z at BHB and 08z at BGR. Expect terminals will drop to IFR by
early-mid morning in rain and patchy fog. 

SHORT TERM: 
Monday-Mon night...MVFR/IFR in rain. Fog possible at night. 
Light and variable winds.

Tuesday..Mainly VFR with possible MVFR in rain/drizzle. S winds
around 5 kts.

Tue Night...MVFR/IFR possible in fog. S winds around 5 kts.

Wednesday-Thursday...Uncertainty; VFR/MVFR with a chance of 
showers possible. S winds 5-10 kts.

&&

.MARINE...
NEAR TERM: The wind and seas are expected to remain below 
small craft advisory levels through tonight. As weak low 
pressure begins to advance toward the waters from the south late
Sunday night the pressure gradient will begin to tighten a bit 
with an east wind to increase to 15 to 20 knots by daybreak 
Monday morning on the outer waters. Patchy fog will be possible 
over the waters this morning and again tonight. A steady rain 
will develop over the waters tonight.

SHORT TERM: Winds and seas remain below SCA conditions for this
time period.

&&

.CAR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
ME...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$

Near Term...CB/Buster
Short Term...LaFlash
Long Term...LaFlash
Aviation...CB/Buster/LaFlash
Marine...CB/Buster/LaFlash
