FXUS61 KGYX 231932
AFDGYX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Gray ME
332 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Coastal low pressure will continue to track north along the
Eastern Seaboard tonight, with rain likely near the Mass border
by around sunset before gradually spreading north and east 
tonight. Unsettled, warm, and at times foggy conditions prevail 
through midweek. A cold front likely clears the area on 
Thursday, bringing cooler and drier conditions for the end of 
the week and the start of next weekend. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM MONDAY MORNING/...
Visible satellite imagery this afternoon shows a cirrus shield
continuing to advance northward across the area as a stratus
deck begins to nudge into southern NH. Northeast radar mosaic
imagery shows returns as far north as Boston, MA but latest ASOS
reports indicate that the leading edge of this precipitation is
not reaching the ground. This is due to a deep dry layer aloft,
which will gradually be overcome from south to north through
early this evening. Current temperatures range from near 70
degrees across northern areas where more in the way of sunshine
has occurred today to the upper 50s and lower 60s further to
the south. 

A surface warm front and associated weak waves of low pressure
will continue to track northward along the Eastern Seaboard
tonight, which will result in a band of stratiform rain to
overspread the CWA from south to north. There continues to be 
some difference amongst model guidance but current indications 
are for at least showers to develop near the Massachusetts state
line by around sunset before these advance northward to the 
Portland area by around 10pm or so. These will then become more 
of a stratiform rain overnight. Patchy fog is also likely to 
develop, especially late tonight given the plethora of low level
moisture. Light and variable winds early this evening will 
increase some later tonight as a stronger push of a LLJ crosses 
overhead. The latest HRRR indicates that the greatest chance 
for a few gusts up to 20-25mph or so will be across the Mid-
Coast of ME. In terms of rainfall amounts, given the differences
in model guidance the forecast is mostly WPC QPF, which brings
in between 0.50-0.75" along the coast to less than 0.20" near
the Canadian Border by Monday morning. Overnight lows will be
limited to the 40s to lower 50s. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM MONDAY MORNING THROUGH MONDAY NIGHT/...
Stratiform rain will lead to mostly showery weather on Monday as
we sit within a weak warm sector. The latest few CAM runs
indicate the potential for some convective showers to develop
during the early to mid-afternoon hours across interior 
locations and given that there will be around 35-45 kts of 
effective bulk shear and a few hundred joules of MUCAPE present 
went ahead and kept the slight chance thunder into the forecast.
While not expecting any strong storms given poor mid-level 
lapse rates and the presence of an inversion from a CAD, any 
convective showers will have the potential of producing locally 
heavy rainfall as PWATs will be near the daily maximums. 
Generally expecting an additional 0.50-0.75" of rain during the 
day but locally higher amounts will be possible within any 
convection or training. Across the far north, rain will remain
very light with rainfall amounts of generally less than 0.50". 
It will otherwise be another mild and muggy day with highs 
primarily into the lower 60s. 

Scattered showers will continue through Monday night but they
will likely become more scattered in nature as the greatest
forcing begins to exit the region. It will otherwise be a mild
and humid night with overnight low temperatures only falling
into the lower 50s across most locations. Fog is also likely to
develop, which could become locally dense in some locations. 

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
Deep 500 MB trough to our west and 500 MB ridging to our SE 
continue to battle it out out through mid meek before the weak 
remnants of sub-tropical low near Bermuda move around the 
Atlantic ridge and into New England on Wednesday, which keeps us
mostly in onshore flow Tuesday and Wednesday, with lots of 
clouds, some fog, and the best chance for rain on Wednesday. 
Despite all the clouds, very warm air aloft should allow temps 
to reach into the low to mid 60s in many areas. Once this system
moves out on Thursday, it will cool off for late in the week 
with dry wx , as large sfc ridge moves in from the W. It won;t 
stay cold for too long, as split flow in the jet over the 
Pacific carves out a ridge over the wrn CONUS, and provide 
warmer SW flow in the east. 

Expecting a break from showers on Tuesday, although a few 
cannot be completely ruled, and some DZ is possible as well, 
especially in the morning. There’s a chance for some sun across 
inland parts of NH on Tuesday, but clouds will linger along the 
coast through the day and in ME. Highs will generally be in the 
mid-upper 60s. Fog develops Tuesday night with lows in the mid 
to upper 50s. That remnant low moves in on Wed, but there is a 
fair amount of certainty as to where it ends up and what kind of
impact it may have, so have kept chance of showers in the 
forecast Wed into Wed evening. Probably there will be more in 
the way of clouds on Wednesday, but, like Tuesday if there is 
any sun, it’ll be in the west and highs once again reach the 
mid-upper 60s.

The low lifts N of the CWA on Thursday and front move though 
the CWA with clearing skies. Highs range from around 60 in the N
to the upper 60s on the coast as NW flow does its downslope 
thing. IT turns cooler on Friday with highs closer to normal in 
the 50s, but should see a slight warm up each, with mainly dry 
conditions through Sunday. 
 

&&

.AVIATION /19Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Short Term...VFR conditions early this evening will deteriorate
from south to north tonight as a surface warm front lifts 
northward bringing widespread -RA to all TAF sites. SHRA will 
begin across southern terminals including KMHT by around 00Z 
before reaching more northern sites such as KAUG and KHIE 
between 04-06Z Monday. Ceilings will also lower with BR 
developing, resulting in IFR/LIFR restrictions overnight. 
Continued restrictions are then expected on Monday through at 
least Monday evening as SHRA continues along with BR/FG. 

Long Term...Expecting Tue morning to start IFR or lower at most
terminals in fog and stratus, but should see improvement at
KHIE/KLEB/KMHT/KCON to MVFR and probably VFR during the
afternoon. The ME terminals may see a period of MVFR Tue
afternoon, but may be stuck at IFR. IFR or lower should return
to all terminals Tue night. Some improvement expected Wed
morning, but will probably not do better than MVFR at most
terminals. VFR returns late Wed night through the end of the 
week. 



&&

.MARINE...
Short Term...Seas will build to 3-5 ft this evening across
southern waters and therefore an SCA remains in effect for late
tonight. Elsewhere seas will largely remain below 5 ft but NE
winds will increase overnight with gusts up to around 20 kts.
Winds decrease on Monday through Monday night but showers will
continue. 

Long Term...Winds/seas stay below SCA levels through the end of
the week. Areas of dense fog will be possible Tuesday through
Wednesday.


&&

.GYX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
ME...None.
NH...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory from 11 PM this evening to 2 PM EDT 
     Monday for ANZ154.

&&

$$

NEAR TERM...Tubbs
SHORT TERM...Tubbs
LONG TERM...Cempa
