FXUS61 KCAR 231926
AFDCAR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Caribou ME
326 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure will move east of the area tonight. A trough of low 
pressure will lift north across our region on Monday then dissipate 
on Tuesday as high pressure returns. Low pressure will approach from 
the south on Wednesday and slide east of the area Wednesday night. 
High pressure will build in from the west Thursday into Friday. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
High pressure along the Downeast coast with ridge axis extending
down into the central Appalachians. Low pressure is currently
spinning off of the Carolina Coast with inverted trough
extending north along the Eastern Seaboard. Extremely dry
airmass in place across the CWA this afternoon and looks to
prevent much in the way of rainfall moving onshore until late
this evening when bndry lyr saturates down. 

Have slowed the movement of rain to the north as it will be 
battling high pressure and dry air throughout the morning hours.
It appears that between 18z-21z the entire region will see rain.
PW values will increase to above 1 inch after 18z with Downeast
areas increase to +1.5 inches, some 3-4 standard deviations
above normal. Storm total rainfall amounts over Downeast and the
Bangor region look to range between 0.75-1 inch before showers
end during the short term pd. Cannot rule out an isolated storm
sneaking onto the Downeast coast, possibly leading to locally 
heavy rainfall during the mid-late morning hours. 

Low temps tonight will settle out in the m/u 40s under
increasing clouds. High temps will struggle to reach 60 degrees
during the day Monday. This is still well above seasonal norms.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH TUESDAY NIGHT/...
A subtropical trough of low pressure over the area Monday evening 
may bring some light rain, mainly to southern areas, early Monday 
night as moisture continues to push westward into the frontal 
boundary from high pressure well to our east. Otherwise, the trough 
will gradually dissipate Monday night into Tuesday as surface high 
pressure centered to our east ridges back west across the area. 
Tuesday will remain mostly cloudy with low level moisture lingering. 
However, it will be unseasonably warm with highs Tuesday expected to 
approach the mid 60s across inland locations. This will be followed 
by a mostly cloudy and unseasonably warm night Tuesday night with 
lows only in the mid 50s. A very light gradient will allow low 
clouds to remain over the area although the surface ridge extending 
west from high pressure to our east will continue to linger across 
the area keeping our region rain free. 

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
Our focus on Wednesday will turn to a weak subtropical low off the 
Mid-Atlantic coast. A trough of low pressure digging into the upper 
Mid-West combined with subtropical high pressure well to our east 
will lift this low north toward our area bringing a chance of some 
rain. The rain will be mainly over southern areas Wednesday morning 
then up across the rest of the area Wednesday afternoon into 
Wednesday night as the low lifts north. Rainfall may be supported by 
divergence aloft ahead of the approaching Mid-Western trough. 
Wednesday will continue to be unseasonably warm with highs from the 
upper 60s north to the low 60s Downeast. Low pressure will continue 
lifting to the north northeast Wednesday night as it combines with a 
surface low in Canada, supported by the trough to our west lifting 
north into western Quebec. High pressure building in from the Great 
Lakes will push a cold front across the area Thursday morning 
bringing clearing followed by a push of cooler drier air. Thursday 
will still be mild with highs generally in the low to mid 60s. 
Noticeably cooler and drier air will push into the region Thursday 
night with lows from near freezing north to the low 40s Downeast. 
High pressure sliding to our north will bring a mostly sunny and 
seasonably cool day on Friday followed by a clear and chilly night 
Friday night. High pressure will remain nearby to the northeast on 
Saturday bringing a partly sunny, tranquil and dry day with a slight 
increase in high clouds as a weak upper level surface trough 
approaches. 

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
NEAR TERM: VFR over the Aroostook terminals next 24 hours. VFR
light rain should move into HUL toward 16z Mon afternoon.

Downeast terminals likely to see MVFR restrictions move in after
06z at BHB and 08z at BGR. Expect terminals will drop to IFR by
early-mid morning in rain and patchy fog. 

SHORT TERM: 
We're generally looking at low clouds hanging over the region
through mid-week before a cold front comes through on Thursday
followed by high pressure bringing clearer drier weather late 
this week into the coming weekend. 

Monday night...IFR. Light SE wind. 

Tuesday...IFR possibly improving to MVFR. S wind. 

Tuesday night into Wednesday...MVFR to IFR north with a light S 
wind. IFR south with a light E wind. 

Wednesday night..IFR. Light E wind becoming W. 

Thursday...IFR improving to VFR. W wind becoming NW and gusty. 

Thursday night into Friday...VFR. NW wind. 

&&

.MARINE...
NEAR TERM: Winds and seas will remain below SCA levels through
this evening. Seas over the outer waters will approach 22kts
after midnight through daybreak and then diminish through Mon
morning. Patchy fog and steady rain will likely reduce
visibilities over the waters tonight. An isolated storm cannot
be ruled out on Monday.  

SHORT TERM: 
NW winds may gust up to 25 kt Thursday night into early Friday.
Otherwise, wind and seas should remain below SCA through the
coming week. Humid air over the waters may result in some fog
and mist early to mid week. Vsby should improve on Thursday and
be good Friday into the coming weekend with high pressure
building in. 

&&

.CAR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
ME...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$

Near Term...Buster
Short Term...Bloomer
Long Term...Bloomer
Aviation...Buster/Bloomer
Marine...Buster/Bloomer
