ACUS02 KWNS 231721
SWODY2
SPC AC 231719

Day 2 Convective Outlook  
NWS Storm Prediction Center Norman OK
1219 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Valid 241200Z - 251200Z

...THERE IS A SLIGHT RISK OF SEVERE THUNDERSTORMS FROM CENTRAL TX 
EASTWARD TO THE ARKLATEX...EAST TX/FAR WESTERN LA...AND MIDDLE/UPPER
 TX COASTS...

...SUMMARY...
Severe thunderstorms are possible from central Texas eastward to the
Arklatex, east Texas, far western Louisiana and middle/upper Texas
Coast Monday evening and overnight. Damaging gusts will be the main
hazard with these storms, though a tornado or two is also possible.

...Synopsis...
A complex upper pattern evolution is anticipated on Monday as a
large-scale upper trough gradually moves eastward across the Plains.
Two shortwave troughs embedded within the larger-scale trough will
focus severe thunderstorm potential on Monday. The first shortwave
trough will be located over the northern Plains early in the period,
and the other over the Southwest. The northern Plains shortwave is
expected to quickly lift northeast during the morning, while the
Southwest shortwave moves eastward from the Four Corners and into
the southern Plains during the afternoon and into the overnight
hours. 

Another weak shortwave impulse over northern Mexico will precede the
Southwest shortwave across TX, while the remnants of Hurricane
Roslyn move quickly northeastward along the TX Coast into the Lower
MS Valley.

An occluded surface low will be located over eastern ND Monday
morning, with an occluded front extending southeastward to a triple
point over central MN. A cold front will then extend southwestward
from this triple point through the Lower MO Valley into central OK.
The front is expected to progress gradually eastward throughout day,
with the exception being the southern extent of the front in TX,
which will only make minor eastward progress until Monday evening
when stronger surface cyclogenesis occurs along the Red River. This
surface low will then shift east/northeast into AR overnight, as the
shortwave upper trough ejects eastward and the front surges eastward
toward the Sabine Valley and TX coast.

...Northwest MN...

Thunderstorms will likely be ongoing early Monday morning near the
surface low and along the northeastward advancing front. Forecast
guidance suggest MLCAPE as high as 750 J/kg will be present amid
strong vertical shear. Fast storm motion coupled with strong
low/mid-level flow and modest instability could support isolated
strong gusts for a couple hours Monday morning before convection
lifts north into Manitoba/western Ontario.

...Southern Plains Vicinity...

Showers and thunderstorms will be ongoing in the vicinity of the
front from southeast KS across central OK and into southwest TX. 
Buoyancy will be tempered by relatively warm mid-level temperatures
but moderate mid-level flow with a 40+ kt southerly low-level jet
could still result in a few updrafts capable of hail and/or strong
downdrafts. 

The front will progress eastward across KS/MO/OK during through the
afternoon/evening, but become more diffuse across TX as a surface
low develops across western North TX during the afternoon. The
surface low should develop eastward along the Red River and into AR
during the evening and overnight hours, allowing the TX portion of
the cold front to surge eastward while the upper shortwave trough
ejects eastward into the Plains. This will support additional
thunderstorm development along the front as large-scale ascent
increases within a moist and moderately unstable airmass. Linear
segments will support mainly damaging gusts. However, enlarged and
favorably curved low-level hodograph suggest some tornado potential
will exist near the front and surface low, where low-level vorticity
will be maximized.

..Leitman.. 10/23/2022

$$
