ACUS01 KWNS 231951
SWODY1
SPC AC 231949

Day 1 Convective Outlook  
NWS Storm Prediction Center Norman OK
0249 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Valid 232000Z - 241200Z

...THERE IS A SLIGHT RISK OF SEVERE THUNDERSTORMS ACROSS PARTS OF
THE CENTRAL PLAINS AND UPPER MIDWEST...

...SUMMARY...
Thunderstorms capable of severe wind gusts and hail are possible
from parts of the central Plains to Upper Midwest through tonight.

...20z Update...

An increasing cumulus field and isolated thunderstorm is noted
across parts of northern KS into southern NE at 1945z, indicating
increasing ascent and modest destabilization. Surface dewpoints have
mixed out into the 30s and 40s F across this area, but just
downstream toward the MO River Valley, dewpoints are in the low/mid
50s F. Capping remains further east, but this should continue to
decrease as large-scale ascent increases with time, and warm air
advection continues ahead of the surface cold front. Thunderstorm
coverage and accompanying severe potential should increase by
21-23z, posing a threat for strong/damaging gusts into the
evening/overnight. No changes have been made to the ongoing outlook
across the central Plains/Upper Midwest. 

Additional thunderstorm development is still expected across parts
of the southern Plains near the end of the period. Strong gusts and
perhaps small hail may accompany this activity over parts of
northwest TX into southwest OK, mainly after 09z. No changes have
been made to this portion of the outlook.

..Leitman.. 10/23/2022

.PREV DISCUSSION... /ISSUED 1130 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022/

...Central Plains to Upper Midwest...
A prominent western states upper trough continues to evolve/amplify
over the Rockies and Four Corners, with a strong mid/upper-level jet
expected to develop northeastward from Arizona/New Mexico across the
central Plains toward the Upper Midwest. Lee-side cyclogenesis will
continue to occur initially across the central Plains while
transitioning northeastward toward the eastern Dakotas tonight as a
cold front begins to accelerate eastward across the central
Plains/Upper Midwest. 

Modest autumnal low-level moisture will continue to stream northward
and become increasing established within the warm sector ahead of
the cold front, and more so, the preceding dryline across the
central/southern Plains, although mixing (and some possible surface
dewpoint reduction) will also occur as the boundary layer warms
through peak heating. Isolated to widely scattered thunderstorms are
expected along/ahead of the combined cold front/dryline as early as
late afternoon, but more so toward/after sunset.

Any surface-based thunderstorms will have the potential for isolated
severe hail and wind gusts, given supercell-favorable vertical shear
and fast storm motion atop a residually well-mixed warm-sector
boundary layer. An increasing low-level jet (50-70 kt after 00Z)
will enlarge low-level hodographs, with 30-35 kt shear-vector
magnitudes in the effective-inflow layer, and effective SRH
potentially in the 300-500 m2/s2 range.

...West-central/northwest Texas to southwest Oklahoma...
Widely scattered to scattered thunderstorms are possible late
tonight across this region, as the combined fronts overtake the
dryline and impinge on increasing deep-layer moisture. Neither
middle nor upper-level lapse rates are expected to be particularly
steep. However, with increasing low-level moisture, and
strengthening deep shear, an organizing band of convection may
strengthen enough to produce a few embedded storms capable of
isolated hail and/or wind gusts near severe limits.

$$
