FNUS21 KWNS 231646
FWDDY1

Day 1 Fire Weather Outlook  
NWS Storm Prediction Center Norman OK
1146 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Valid 231700Z - 241200Z

...CRITICAL FIRE WEATHER AREA FOR PARTS OF THE CENTRAL PLAINS...

No changes to the ongoing forecast.

..Wendt.. 10/23/2022

.PREV DISCUSSION... /ISSUED 0159 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022/

...Synopsis...
In the mid-levels, a strong western US trough will intensify further
as an 80-90 kt mid-level jet ejects eastward across the southern and
central Rockies over the Plains. The strong mid-level flow will aid
in the development of a sub-990 mb lee low and very strong surface
wind fields over much of the central US. With widespread drought
across the Plains, the strong winds and dry/warm conditions will
support widespread critical fire weather concerns. 

...Central and southern Plains...
As the strong area of low pressure continues to deepen and eject
northeastward, low-level southwesterly pressure gradients will
intensify over much of the Plains. A broad area of sustained 25-40
mph winds, with gusts upwards of 50 mph, will be possible through
the afternoon. Coincident with diurnal heating, areas of low to
critical RH (15-30%) are expected through the afternoon. RH will be
lowest across the High Plains west of the lee trough, with values
near or above 30% likely farther east. In addition, fuels remain
highly receptive to fire spread due to ongoing drought over all of
the Plains with ERCs in the 90th+ percentile. The overlap of highly
receptive fuels, strong winds and lower RH lends high confidence to
sustained elevated and some critical fire weather conditions this
afternoon. 

A few hours of localized extremely critical conditions will also be
possible mainly across portions of western KS and far eastern CO
where the strongest winds are expected. While mid-level cloud cover
may reduce afternoon mixing, strong downslope flow and warm
temperatures may still support a few pockets of sub 10% RH and wind
gusts greater than 50 mph. The favorable meteorological and fuel
conditions may support rapid wind-driven fire spread. 

...California...
Along the backside of the trough, strong mid-level flow will support
gusty surface winds through the Central Valley and coastal
mountains. While fuels remain spotty, a few hours of lower humidity
and gusty winds may support locally elevated fire weather
conditions. Confidence remains too low to introduce areas of
concern.

...Please see www.spc.noaa.gov/fire for graphic product...

$$
