FOUS30 KWBC 231931
QPFERD

Excessive Rainfall Discussion
NWS Weather Prediction Center College Park MD
326 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Day 1
Valid 16Z Sun Oct 23 2022 - 12Z Mon Oct 24 2022

The probability of rainfall exceeding flash flood guidance is less
than 5 percent.

Campbell




Day 2
Valid 12Z Mon Oct 24 2022 - 12Z Tue Oct 25 2022

...THERE IS A SLIGHT RISK OF EXCESSIVE RAINFALL OVER PORTIONS OF
THE SOUTHERN PLAINS FROM MONDAY INTO EARLY TUESDAY MORNING...

21Z update... Most of the guidance is suggesting the QPF will
align into two axis of higher amounts instead of one. The first
axis spans from northeast Texas into northwest/north-central
Arkansas and the other from central Oklahoma to southwest
Missouri. Areal averages are still in the 2 to 4+ inch range, with
isolated maxes 5-6 inches possible. A majority of the QPF
footprint already fell within the inherited Slight Risk area;
however the western bounds was expanded westward into central
Oklahoma and the southern bounds was adjusted south and east to
reflect the latest trends. The Marginal Risk area had minor
reshaping to reflect the latest trends and the WPC QPF. The most
favorable area for the highest amounts continue to be the area
from northeast Texas into Arkansas.

Campbell

Previous discussion... Only some modest changes were needed as
yesterday's Day 3 Excessive Rainfall Outlook propagated into
today's Day 2 period.  The overall synoptic pattern was
similar...with an anomalously deep mid and upper low making its
way from the Rockies over the Southern Plains by late afternoon on
Monday while a cold front associated with a deep surface low in
the northern stream progresses south and east towards the Southern
Plains.  In terms of the guidance, the NAM and GFS remained on the
faster side of guidance while the ECMWF was on the slower/western
side of the envelope of solutions. This keeps eastern/southeastern
OK into western Arkansas and northeast Texas as the areas most
likely in play with convection eventually spreading into
southwestern Missouri late. The ARW members of the SREF are most
aggressive in bringing 2 to 3 inch isohyets into Iowa but the NMM
members of the SREF and the 23/00Z GEFS only had a couple of
members reaching northern Missouri.  At this point...extended the
Marginal a bit north of the previous position but the better
divergence aloft in the 400 mb to 200 mb layer stays to the south
in conjunction with the upper low.  The change made earlier to
elongate the Slight Risk area in order to account for possible
training near the front in northeast Texas and orographic
enhancement across southwest Missouri still looks reasonable. Much
of this part of the country has lacked appreciable precipitation
and this event will tend to provide beneficial rains to the local
drought areas...although the duration of any intense rainfall
rates may tip the scales from the welcomed moisture to local
flashy runoff conditions.

Bann


Day 3

The Day 3 outlook will be updated by 2030Z.


Day 1 threat area: https://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/qpf/94epoints.txt
Day 2 threat area: https://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/qpf/98epoints.txt
Day 3 threat area: https://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/qpf/99epoints.txt


$$


