FOUS30 KWBC 232011
QPFERD

Excessive Rainfall Discussion
NWS Weather Prediction Center College Park MD
410 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Day 1
Valid 16Z Sun Oct 23 2022 - 12Z Mon Oct 24 2022

The probability of rainfall exceeding flash flood guidance is less
than 5 percent.

Campbell




Day 2
Valid 12Z Mon Oct 24 2022 - 12Z Tue Oct 25 2022

...THERE IS A SLIGHT RISK OF EXCESSIVE RAINFALL OVER PORTIONS OF
THE SOUTHERN PLAINS FROM MONDAY INTO EARLY TUESDAY MORNING...

21Z update... Most of the guidance is suggesting the QPF will
align into two axis of higher amounts instead of one. The first
axis spans from northeast Texas into northwest/north-central
Arkansas and the other from central Oklahoma to southwest
Missouri. Areal averages are still in the 2 to 4+ inch range, with
isolated maxes 5-6 inches possible. A majority of the QPF
footprint already fell within the inherited Slight Risk area;
however the western bounds was expanded westward into central
Oklahoma and the southern bounds was adjusted south and east to
reflect the latest trends. The Marginal Risk area had minor
reshaping to reflect the latest trends and the WPC QPF. The most
favorable area for the highest amounts continue to be the area
from northeast Texas into Arkansas.

Campbell

Previous discussion... Only some modest changes were needed as
yesterday's Day 3 Excessive Rainfall Outlook propagated into
today's Day 2 period.  The overall synoptic pattern was
similar...with an anomalously deep mid and upper low making its
way from the Rockies over the Southern Plains by late afternoon on
Monday while a cold front associated with a deep surface low in
the northern stream progresses south and east towards the Southern
Plains.  In terms of the guidance, the NAM and GFS remained on the
faster side of guidance while the ECMWF was on the slower/western
side of the envelope of solutions. This keeps eastern/southeastern
OK into western Arkansas and northeast Texas as the areas most
likely in play with convection eventually spreading into
southwestern Missouri late. The ARW members of the SREF are most
aggressive in bringing 2 to 3 inch isohyets into Iowa but the NMM
members of the SREF and the 23/00Z GEFS only had a couple of
members reaching northern Missouri.  At this point...extended the
Marginal a bit north of the previous position but the better
divergence aloft in the 400 mb to 200 mb layer stays to the south
in conjunction with the upper low.  The change made earlier to
elongate the Slight Risk area in order to account for possible
training near the front in northeast Texas and orographic
enhancement across southwest Missouri still looks reasonable. Much
of this part of the country has lacked appreciable precipitation
and this event will tend to provide beneficial rains to the local
drought areas...although the duration of any intense rainfall
rates may tip the scales from the welcomed moisture to local
flashy runoff conditions.

Bann


Day 3
Valid 12Z Tue Oct 25 2022 - 12Z Wed Oct 26 2022

...THERE IS A MARGINAL RISK OF EXCESSIVE RAINFALL FROM PORTIONS OF
THE SOUTHERN AND MID MISSISSIPPI VALLEY INTO THE SOUTHERN/WESTERN
GREAT LAKES TUESDAY AND TUESDAY NIGHT...

21Z update... No major changes with the pattern evolution and
timing from the previous issuance. Model guidance persist will the
higher QPF spanning from northern Arkansas to locations around
southern Lake Michigan. The Marginal Risk that was already in
effect remains is good standing and only minor tweaks were made on
the northern side to expand about a tier of counties to reflect
the latest WPC QPF.

Campbell

Previous discussion... The very dynamic system making its way
across the Southern Plains late in the Day 2 period will begin to
lift northward across the Central Mississippi Valley into parts of
the Western Tennessee/Ohio Valleys en route to portions of the
southern Great Lakes by early Wednesday morning. With precipitable
water values at or slightly above 1.75 inches being drawn
northward ahead of the closed low and the upper trough taking on a
negative tilt over the western Tennessee Valley by Tuesday evening
(especially seen aloft in the 1.0 and 1.5 PVU surfaces), areas of
heavy to potentially excessive rainfall appear possible.  However,
multiple weeks with little to no rainfall, the limited stability
resulting from fairly warm mid-level temperatures and the fact
that the system should begin accelerating with time all should be
working to counteract the overall excessive rainfall potential.
Even so, am not willing to completely dismiss the excessive
potential given the strength of the dynamics that could compensate
for the lack of instability...so have placed a Marginal Risk area
from the western Tennessee Valley northeastward towards the far
southern Great Lakes region.  Spaghetti plots of the 03Z SREF
members showed a slower eastward solution and better clustering
than indicated by earlier runs for 2 inches and 3 inches in 24
hours which means an upgrade to a Slight Risk may be needed if the
slower/western solution becomes a trend. Other guidance remained
more progressive which resulted in rainfall amounts that were more
modest.

Bann



Day 1 threat area: https://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/qpf/94epoints.txt
Day 2 threat area: https://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/qpf/98epoints.txt
Day 3 threat area: https://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/qpf/99epoints.txt


$$


