FXUS63 KARX 231856
AFDARX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service La Crosse WI
156 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.DISCUSSION...(This evening through Sunday)
Issued at 156 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Messages:

- Strong southerly winds gusting 30 to 45 mph at times likely 
  through tonight

- Scattered showers/storms this evening/tonight could produce 
  some enhancement of already gusty winds, but organized severe 
  storms not expected

- Returning to more seasonable temperatures for the new work week

This evening-Monday: 

GOES water vapor imagery early this afternoon showed a deep trough 
over the Rockies while surface analysis showed a surface cyclone 
across the high plains. Overall, there is little change with this 
forecast update in general thinking, with the surface low tracking 
northeast into Monday with strong, gusty gradient winds ahead of the 
cold frontal passage on Monday.

Expect southerly winds to continue to increase through the afternoon 
with deeper mixing and a strengthening gradient. Winds will remain 
gusty tonight into Monday morning, despite some boundary layer 
stabilization, as a 55-65 kt low-level jet develops. Gusts of 30 to 
45 mph are expected with a few higher gusts possible in open areas, 
especially west. 

Scattered showers/isolated storms will likely develop and progress 
rapidly northeast late this afternoon into tonight in conjunction 
with increasing moisture transport on the nose of the developing low-
level jet and mid-level warm advection. While the thermodynamic 
environment features only modest instability up to a few hundred 
J/kg, and any storms are likely to be fairly loosely 
organized/elevated above the stable layer, the strong kinematic 
fields could support mix down of stronger wind gusts (possibly 45 to 
50+ mph) in any showers/storms. Overall, though, the scenario does 
not favor organized severe weather. Rainfall amounts look quite 
light overnight. 

As deeper lift with the approaching mid level trough interacts with 
the advancing low to mid-level frontal zone on Monday and seasonably 
high atmospheric moisture, expect an expanding rain shield to 
develop through the afternoon. With a warm start to the day (upper 
50s to mid 60s), one more very mild day with highs near/above 70 is 
in store for most areas.

Monday Night - Next Weekend: 

The trough continues moving east of the area by Tuesday morning with 
precipitation chances ending from west to east. Low chances linger 
for locations mainly east of the Mississippi River, but they are 
expected to completely exit the entire forecast area Tuesday 
night. In total by the end of this event, highest rain 
accumulations are expected along and to the southeast of the
Wisconsin River Valley. For 80% of the ensemble solutions, totals
could fall somewhere between 0.25" (10th percentile) up to 1.25" 
(90th percentile) with the mean being around 0.75". Lower amounts
of only a couple hundreths to a couple tenths are anticipated  
off to the northwest into portions of southeast Minnesota away 
from the area of Monday's redevelopment.


In wake of the passing cold front, cooler and more seasonable 
conditions are anticipated to last into next weekend. Afternoon 
temperatures are expected to top out in the 50s, and overnight 
lows dip into the 30s. Weather conditions will be pretty quiet 
through mid-week as surface high pressure builds into the region. 

Although low (<25%), the next chances for precipitation move in from 
the west Thursday afternoon, but diminish heading into the overnight 
hours through Friday the further east the system progresses. Current 
forecasted temperatures being above freezing through this period 
would result as rain being the precipitation type. The associated 
positively tilted upper-level trough slides eastward through the 
region as the base of it dives through Texas. Low confidence on 
these precipitation chances coming to fruition for the local area as 
the better moisture and forcing would be more closely tied to the 
surface low moving through the southern US. Looking at the 75th 
percentile of the grand ensemble (CMC, EPS, GEFS) for 24 hour 
precipitation amounts, some locations may only get a couple 
hundreths in total by Friday evening. The ensemble guidance in the 
lower 50th percentile suggests that much of the region would 
even stay dry heading into next weekend. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1242 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Strong southerly winds at 15-25 kts gusting to 30-35+ kts are 
expected, strongest late this afternoon into tonight, before 
gradually diminishing and shifting to the W/SW during the day on 
Monday behind a cold front. Scattered showers/isolated storms will
quickly lift northeast this evening/tonight with any 
showers/storms potentially producing locally higher wind gusts to 
40 kts. For now have not mentioned any thunder given the expected
coverage. LLWS is expected tonight as a low-level jet ramps up. 
Otherwise, outside of any storms, mainly VFR conditions are 
expected.


&&

.ARX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
WI...NONE.
MN...Wind Advisory from 7 PM this evening to 3 AM CDT Monday for 
     MNZ079-086-087-094.

IA...Wind Advisory from 7 PM this evening to 3 AM CDT Monday for 
     IAZ008-018.

&&

$$

DISCUSSION...JM/Peters
AVIATION...JM
