FXUS63 KARX 231742
AFDARX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service La Crosse WI
1242 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.DISCUSSION...(Today through Saturday)
Issued at 340 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Messages:

 - Continued very warm and windy-Wind Advisory for parts of
   southeast MN/northeast IA 

 - Scattered showers/isolated storms tonight with more widespread
   rain Monday/Monday night 

 - Seasonable temperatures return for the remainder of the week

Overview:   

Recent water vapor satellite imagery, heights, and 
lightning show the closed low over northern Idaho with a broad 
trough extending south toward southern California and Arizona 
extensive mid and high cloudiness to the east across the Rockies 
into the Northern Plains.  Another trough was off of Baja with 
Hurricane Roslyn in the eastern Pacific.  Some lead troughing was 
noted across Iowa toward Kentucky and Tennessee.  At the surface, a 
broad area of sub 990mb low pressure was over eastern Wyoming into 
eastern Colorado with a warm front from southern South Dakota into 
central Minnesota.  Strong branches of the upper level jets were 
over the Pacific Northwest,moving toward Baja, and across southern 
Canada.  Southern deep layer flow covered much of the Plains into 
Mississippi Valley.

Locally, midnight temperatures were 10 degrees above the normal 
highs with brisk south winds.  Skies were generally clear with a few 
a patchy accas across parts of Iowa/southwest Wisconsin.

Today and Monday-Anomalously Warm and Windy - Rain Storm Chances 
through Monday Night:  

Through the day, a 130kt jet dives southward on the west side of the 
long wave trough, as the jet over the Southwest U.S. lifts 
northwest. Broad warm advection increases across the Plains along 
with strengthening 850mb winds with increasing moisture advection.
This moisture advection ramps up tonight and continues into
Monday. Forecast soundings are starting out quite dry, thus making
it difficult to time any spotty showers that may try to get going
this afternoon and early this evening. Lapse rates steepen during
the evening with elevated CAPE. The MLCAPE axis is generally west
of the forecast area, however 100-500J/kg is present through
around 06Z. Deep layer shear is 40 to 50kts, however effective
shear is 20 to 40kts. Due to the very strong winds aloft and
layers of dry air aloft...precipitation could help these stronger
winds mix down. The CSU severe potential has all hazards 
possible, with damaging winds and hail having a higher potential 
west of the Mississippi. Parts of our area...from Buffalo, Winona,
Winneshiek, and Fayette are in the marginal risk for severe 
storms. As mentioned,rain in the area may enhance wind gusts this 
evening and overnight.

Considered a wind advisory for the area due to the strong surface
pressure gradient, strong 60kt low level jet, and mechanical 
mixing with the trough tonight. The high confidence area for the 
stronger winds is to our west, however both the EPS/GEFS mean wind
gusts were in the 35 to 45 mph range from 18Z tonight to 18Z 
Monday. Parts of southeast MN and northeast Iowa appeared to have 
the highest non-convective wind gusts, thus coordinated with 
DMX/MPX on a wind advisory for those counties tonight. The winds 
remain elevated Monday with gusts decreasing below 30 mph after 
00Z. As discussed above, showers in the area could enhance wind 
gusts further.

Have kept pops isolated early on with scattered showers/storms 
mainly after 01Z. Should showers develop aloft during the
afternoon, these will need to be added. Any showers/storms that
develop will be fast-moving with cloud layer speeds of 50 to
60kts. For this reason, rain amounts are on the light side from a
trace to a tenth of an inch.

The trough continues to move through Monday, however better
moisture is being tapped from the southwest, thus more widespread
precipitation is expected, however the precipitation decreases to
the west. Some locations could pick up a quarter to a half an inch
of rain across parts of western WI and northeast Iowa...with
lighter amounts farther west. The trough moves east of the are by
Tuesday morning.

We are starting out quite mild and with strengthening winds at 
all levels, will see temperatures again top out in the 70s to
around 80 in spots. 850mb temperatures max out in the evening,
thus have highs not quite as warm as Saturday, but still 10 to 20
degrees above normal. Lows in the upper 50s to mid 60s will 
remain warm enough to challenge record warm lows. Highs Monday 
will continue in the 70s before falling through the 60s into the
50s later in the day.

Tuesday and Beyond - A Return to More Seasonable Temperatures:

The cold front continues to push east; meanwhile a reinforcing 
trough remains to the north and an area of closed low pressure to 
the south.  There are some differences in how deep the trough is and 
how far north the closed low will be, however the current pace of 
the front has the precipitation clearing the forecast area and 
cooler highs in the 50s for Tuesday.  Northwest winds persist 
Wednesday with a reinforcing push of cold air.  Surface high 
pressure builds in for Thursday as the next longwave trough over the 
Pacific Northwest deepens over the Rockies.  There is reasonable 
agreement in the deterministic models that this storm system will 
remain southwest of the forecast area, however a portion of the 
northern stream trough could result in a spotty shower Friday.  The 
closed low tracks south of the forecast area through Sunday keeping 
the local area mainly dry and seasonable.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1242 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Strong southerly winds at 15-25 kts gusting to 30-35+ kts are 
expected, strongest late this afternoon into tonight, before 
gradually diminishing and shifting to the W/SW during the day on 
Monday behind a cold front. Scattered showers/isolated storms will
quickly lift northeast this evening/tonight with any 
showers/storms potentially producing locally higher wind gusts to 
40 kts. For now have not mentioned any thunder given the expected
coverage. LLWS is expected tonight as a low-level jet ramps up. 
Otherwise, outside of any storms, mainly VFR conditions are 
expected.

&&

.ARX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
WI...NONE.
MN...Wind Advisory from 7 PM this evening to 3 AM CDT Monday for 
     MNZ079-086-087-094.

IA...Wind Advisory from 7 PM this evening to 3 AM CDT Monday for 
     IAZ008-018.

&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Zapotocny
AVIATION...JM
