FXUS63 KMKX 231939
AFDMKX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Milwaukee/Sullivan WI
239 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...
(Issued 239 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022)

Tonight through Monday night:

A warm and windy afternoon is underway across the region, with 2 PM
temperatures generally in the mid 70s. Clouds will increase later
this afternoon and especially this evening, as strong south to
southwest flow brings better moisture into the area. Showers and
perhaps a few rumbles of thunder will blossom across the region
after dark, increasing in coverage into the late night hours. Dry
air will limit rainfall amounts, with less than a tenth of an 
inch of rain expected in most locations. 

There's a good chance that much of the day tomorrow could be dry,
especially for those locations east of Madison. South winds will
remain gusty, with temperatures warming to around 70 despite
widespread clouds. A cold front will start to slowly advance 
eastward later in the day, with temperatures falling from west to 
east during the evening hours. A large area of moderate rain is 
expected along and just behind the surface front, with the swath 
of rain slowly advancing eastward through Monday night. 

Boxell

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Issued 239 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022)

Tuesday through Sunday:

Rain will continue over much of the area Tuesday, though will
likely start to come to an end west of Madison by Tuesday
afternoon. Temperatures on Tuesday will be much cooler, with 50s
for most.  

Rain chances will end very slowly from west to east late Tuesday
into Tuesday night, with just a few showers lingering near Lake
Michigan by Wednesday morning. Total rainfall through Wednesday
morning looks to be on the order of three quarters of an inch to 
an inch and half, with the heavier amounts across the east. 

High pressure then moves into the area for the latter half of the
workweek, with temperatures more typical for late October, with 
highs in the 50s and lows in the 30s. Dry weather looks to persist
into at least next weekend, and perhaps beyond. 

Boxell

&&

.AVIATION...
(Issued 239 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022)

Strong winds will be the main aviation concern through tonight,
with gusty south winds expected into this evening. Low level wind
shear will then become a concern for the overnight hours. The
gusty south winds will persist for much of the day on Monday,
before winds start to turn westerly and then northwesterly behind
a cold front late Monday into Monday night. 

VFR conditions will continue through tonight. Scattered showers
and maybe a thunderstorm or two are expected, but rainfall amounts
will be light and ceilings are expected to remain high based. MVFR
and potentially IFR conditions will start to move into the region
from the west on Monday, most likely during the late afternoon and
evening hours. 

Boxell

&&

.MARINE...
(Issued 239 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022)

Low pressure in western Nebraska will lift northeastward tonight,
reaching northeastern North Dakota by Monday morning. Persistent 
breezy south to southeast winds are expected ahead of the low 
through Monday, eventually becoming northerly by mid-week behind a
cold front. Though there could be a few gusts to 35 knots through
Monday, winds are expected to largely remain below gale force 
given the warmer air over the cooler lake. For the nearshore
waters, a Small Craft Advisory is in effect until Tuesday morning
for the strong south winds and elevated waves. 

Another area of low pressure will lift northeastward from 
Arkansas to Michigan Tuesday and Wednesday. As that area of low 
pressure reaches Michigan on Wednesday, northerly winds will 
increase across the lake, possibly getting close to gale force 
over the southern half of the open waters on Wednesday. 

Boxell

&&

.MKX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
WI...None.
LM...Small Craft Advisory...LMZ643-LMZ644-LMZ645-LMZ646 until 7 AM 
     Tuesday.

&&

$$

Visit us at weather.gov/milwaukee

Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube at:
www.facebook.com/NWSMilwaukee
www.twitter.com/NWSMilwaukee
www.youtube.com/NWSMilwaukee
