FXUS63 KGRB 231741
AFDGRB

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Green Bay WI
1241 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Updated aviation portion for 18Z TAF issuance

.SHORT TERM...Today...Tonight...and Monday
Issued at 355 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Today and tonight...a dry start to the day is expected under 
mostly sunny skies with just some high clouds pushing across the 
area at times. Strong south flow will continue across the western
Great Lakes as a deepening low pressure system slowly moves 
across the Plains. Moisture will slowly increase across the area 
today, with clouds increasing in the afternoon and evening. As the
better moisture, stronger LLJ and better isentropic lift arrives 
this evening, more precip will break out/move into the area. 
Models still showing some weak elevated instability, up to around 
500 J/kg, and steep mid-level lapse rates tonight, so will 
continue to mention thunder. Upsloping winds, increasing low-level
moisture and a pocket of drier air in the mid-levels could lead 
to some drizzle overnight, mainly in northern WI. Soundings 
support mixing to between 1500-2500 ft today, which will bring 
winds up of 25-35 mph to the surface. If we can mix a little 
higher, a few higher gusts will be possible. It will be a little 
harder to mix down the winds tonight, but any of the stronger 
showers could bring down some 30+ mph gusts as winds aloft 
increase to 50+ mph in the LLJ. With plenty of sunshine expected 
today, and mixing to at least 925mb, will once again go above 
guidance. 925mb temps cooled a little from yesterday, but still 
support highs in the upper 60s and 70s, except cooler near the 
shores of Lake Michigan where onshore flow continues. Lows tonight
will be very mild for late October standards, with most spots in 
the mid 50s to low 60s.

For Monday...a break/lull in the precip is expected during the
morning, as the WAA batch exits to the northeast. Some drizzle 
could also continue in the morning over the north. Then as the
strong low pressure system pushes into eastern Manitoba/western
Ontario, a cold front will push across the area in the afternoon
bringing isolated to scattered showers to the area. Thunder 
chances look to wane through the morning hours as we lose what 
instability we had. Winds will remain very strong aloft through 
mid-afternoon, but mixing will be more questionable due to the 
cloud cover. While some higher gusts will be possible, most spots
should gust up to 35 mph. Temps will struggle a little compared 
to previous day due to more clouds in the area, along with the 
rain shower activity, but with a warm start, it looks like we can
get in the mid/upper 60s over north central WI and into the low 
to possibly mid 70s in the Fox Valley. South winds will keep 
cooler temps near Lake Michigan.

.LONG TERM...Monday Night Through Saturday
Issued at 355 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Rain showers will expand across the region as a cold front works 
its way through the region Monday night. Post frontal forcing will
keep showers in the area into Tuesday, especially along eastern 
Wisconsin. By Tuesday night, CAA will bring in high pressure and 
drier conditions for the overnight.

Another low pressure system is then forecast to pass south and
east of our area. General model trends haven't budged much since
yesterday, with the Canadian continuing to be the outlier that
brings this system to Wisconsin. Maintained a dry forecast for
Wednesday and Thursday for now and will continue to monitor if
this will need to be changed as we get into the work week.

Surface high pressure will then gradually depart the region by the
end of the week, which could make another window for some light
showers as we get into the return flow for the weekend. Some light
pops are in the forecast for now.

Temperatures for the extended will be in stark contrast to those
we had this weekend, with highs in the upper 40s and 50s through
the middle of the week. Return flow by the end of the week will
only bump temperatures up a few degrees, back towards the upper
50s for next weekend.
&&

.AVIATION...for 18Z TAF Issuance
Issued at 1240 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Main aviation issue early this afternoon is wind gusts. Winds have
been somewhat slow to increase, but now starting to see S/SSE
gusts up to 25 kts. Expect strong and gusty winds to persist 
through most the TAF period, becoming less gusty overnight. 
However, as the rain showers arrive cannot rule out a shower 
bringing some gusts down to the surface due to strong winds in the
low levels. As low level jet increases this evening LLWS also 
becomes a factor, with winds at 2000 ft around 45 to 50 kts.

Meanwhile, mainly clear skies early this afternoon will cloud over
with middle clouds late this afternoon, followed by lowering cigs
and rain showers late this evening and overnight. Showers will 
have the potential to temporarily lower vsbys (handled by addition
of TEMPO group) and possibly include lightning (lightning 
probability was too low to include in TAFs). A lull in the precip
is expected mid to late Monday morning, although some areas of 
drizzle or very light showers are possible. More widespread 
showers return later Monday afternoon.
&&

.GRB WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM.....Bersch
LONG TERM......Uhlmann
AVIATION.......KLJ
