FXUS63 KGRB 231958
AFDGRB

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Green Bay WI
258 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Forecast discussion for routine afternoon forecast issuance

.SYNOPSIS...
Issued at 258 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Showers at times tonight into Tuesday night. Temperatures settling
back closer to seasonal normals by mid-week.

A deep upper trough was over the Intermountain West, while the 
downstream ridge was far to the east over the western Atlantic. 
The long wavelength between the features will allow the trough to 
quickly broaden/expand east during the next few days as a strong 
cyclone tracks from the central Plains to the Hudson Bay region. 
During the latter half of the period, the pattern will transition 
to a split regime with a broad, seasonably strong band of low- 
amplitude westerlies across Canada and a weaker southern stream 
across the southern CONUS.

The unseasonably warm air presently across the area will be
replaced with an air mass much more typical of this time of year.
The result will be temperatures dropping and then settling in at 
slightly above normal levels for the rest of the period. The bulk 
of the precipitation will occur early in the period, with little 
chance for significant rainfall after Tuesday night. The best 
estimate is for AOB normal precipitation for the 7 day period, 
with perhaps a little better chance for getting near normal 
amounts in the SE part of the forecast area.
&&

.SHORT TERM...Tonight and Monday
Issued at 258 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Afternoon sunshine has once again warmed temperatures into the 70s
in most places, aside from the lake shore due to onshore winds.
This has also led to mixing up to around 850 mb where winds are
stronger, and as a result gusts have ranged from 20 to 30 mph.

This evening and overnight...A strengthening low level jet and
warm advection will lead to the start of rain showers late this 
evening and overnight. Forecast soundings show a small amount of 
elevated instability along with steep mid-level lapse rates of
7.5C/km. Not expecting any severe thunderstorms, but brief, 
gusty winds are possible within any showers or storms due to the 
50 kt LL jet above the surface. Southerly surface winds will 
remain steady due to the tight pressure gradient, but will be 
somewhat less gusty overnight--aside from within the precip. The 
combination of steady winds, clouds, and warm advection means a 
very mild night for late October. Lows are forecast to level off 
in the lower 60s.

Monday...As initial wave of forcing (LL warm advection and jet)
pivot off to the northeast, expect a lull in the showers from mid
morning through early afternoon, especially across the eastern
forecast area. South winds will remain strong, especially during 
the first half of the day, with sustained winds of 15 to 20 mph 
and gusts of 30 to 35 mph. Not expecting winds high enough to 
warrant any type of wind headline, but there will be enough to 
possible cause outdoor decor or garbages to move around. 
Meanwhile, skies will be cloudy leading to slightly cooler high
temps, in the middle 60s to lower 70s. Main surface low will move
from the northern Plains into western Ontario Monday afternoon, 
dragging a cold front along with it. As this front approaches
central and northeast WI will start to see an uptick in rain again
starting mid-afternoon, likely in central WI first and then 
expanding east.

.LONG TERM...Monday Night Through Sunday
Issued at 258 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The primary cyclone associated with the western trough will shift
from Ontario into the Hudson Bay region Monday night into Tuesday.
The cold front trailing from the cyclone will weaken as it slowly
crosses the region during that time frame. Multi-faceted forcing 
for ascent is expected to be present across the area at times 
Monday night through Tuesday night as the front crosses the region
and then stalls just to the east. Isentropic lift, QG forcing, 
upper divergence in the RRQ of an upper speed max, and some FGEN 
forcing will all come into play at some point, but will not 
be especially strong or necessarily align in time and space. The 
result will probably be clusters/bands of showers shifting through
the area. Perhaps the best chance for more focused forcing and 
stronger ascent will be in eastern Wisconsin late Tuesday into 
Tuesday night, as a frontal wave riding along the stalled boundary
lifts NNE toward Lower Michigan. 

Quiet weather is anticipated from mid-week through next weekend as
the forecast area becomes situated between the primary branches 
of the evolving split flow regime. That will allow an anticyclone 
to linger across the area for several days.

Leaned toward a broad based blend of temperatures for lows Monday
night. That was warmer than the NBM and seemed a better fit for
a possible slower progression of the front across the area. NBM
temperatures seemed okay thereafter.
&&

.AVIATION...for 18Z TAF Issuance
Issued at 1240 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Main aviation issue early this afternoon is wind gusts. Winds have
been somewhat slow to increase, but now starting to see S/SSE
gusts up to 25 kts. Expect strong and gusty winds to persist 
through most the TAF period, becoming less gusty overnight. 
However, as the rain showers arrive cannot rule out a shower 
bringing some gusts down to the surface due to strong winds in the
low levels. As low level jet increases this evening LLWS also 
becomes a factor, with winds at 2000 ft around 45 to 50 kts.

Meanwhile, mainly clear skies early this afternoon will cloud over
with middle clouds late this afternoon, followed by lowering cigs
and rain showers late this evening and overnight. Showers will 
have the potential to temporarily lower vsbys (handled by addition
of TEMPO group) and possibly include lightning (lightning 
probability was too low to include in TAFs). A lull in the precip
is expected mid to late Monday morning, although some areas of 
drizzle or very light showers are possible. More widespread 
showers return later Monday afternoon.
&&

.GRB WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

SYNOPSIS.......Skowronski
SHORT TERM.....KLJ
LONG TERM......Skowronski
AVIATION.......KLJ
