FXUS64 KHUN 212250
AFDHUN

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Huntsville AL
550 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...New AVIATION...

.NEAR TERM...
(Tonight)
Issued at 304 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A strong mid-latitude jet moving ashore the Pacific NW (with 
250mb wind speeds over 180kt across the Gulf of Alaska) will 
induce troughing over the western lower-48 during the course of 
weekend and early next week. This will help formerly persistent 
troughing along the eastern half of the CONUS weaken and retreat 
northward. An area of low pressure forming off of the east coast 
will bring an increase in clouds, which should remain east of the
region. 

Surface high pressure off of the New England coast will help bring
a southerly flow across the southeastern CONUS. This and more sun
than clouds will continue a warming trend for the upcoming weekend
and into early next week. Under generally clear skies, lows
tonight should range from the mid 40s east to lower 50s west 
with light SE-S winds. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...
(Saturday through Monday)
Issued at 304 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A dry and warm trend will continue for the weekend and early next
week, as high pressure remains east of the region. High
temperatures to end the week should warm into the mid/upper 70s,
certainly a warmer change from earlier in the week. Similar 
weather is expected Sunday, and a bit warmer on Monday with highs 
in the upper 70s. Lows will remain in the mid 40s east to lower 
50s west.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Monday night through Friday)
Issued at 304 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A deep southerly flow will help bring gradually warmer air to the
region. Lows Monday night will range in the low/mid 50s and highs
in the upper 70s to near 80. 

Troughing out west will result in the development of a synoptic
scale storm system over the Western states. This system will move
to ENE, reaching the Great Lakes region by Tuesday. A cold front
and possibly new low along the front nearing the Ozarks will bring
an increase in clouds and slight chance of showers mainly Tue
afternoon. Somewhat higher chances of showers are forecast on Tue
night as this frontal boundary moves across the area. Did not see
enough instability/lift for thunder, so did not include it this
issuance. That said, a rumble or two of thunder cannot be ruled
out. Dry weather returns for the midweek as drier air filters in
from the west. High pressure moving in will be of Pacific origin,
thus not as cool for the latter half of the week. Highs near 70 on
Wednesday will warm into mid/upper 70s by end of the work week.
Another system approaching from the west will bring lower end rain
chances to end the work week. 

&&

.AVIATION...
(00Z TAFS)
Issued at 550 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR flight weather conditions are expected during the period.

&&

.HUN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AL...None.
TN...None.
&&

$$

NEAR TERM...RSB
SHORT TERM....RSB
LONG TERM....RSB
AVIATION...17
