FXUS64 KHUN 220208
AFDHUN

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Huntsville AL
908 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...New NEAR TERM...

.NEAR TERM...
(Tonight)
Issued at 907 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Clear skies continue on the western edge of an area of high
pressure that extends from the Mid-Atlantic area into the Florida
panhandle. Winds have picked up to around 5 mph from the south near
and west of the I-65 corridor. Expect this to occur further east 
around and after midnight. These winds and low level warm
air/moisture advection, should keep lows from dropping much below
the mid 40s to around 50 degrees in most locations. The exceptions
to this look to be near the AL/MS border, where southwest flow
could bring higher dewpoints into that area and keep lows from
dropping below the 54 to 56 degree range in some locations. In 
sheltered areas of northeastern Alabama, where winds will remain 
lighter until closer to midnight or shortly after, lows should be 
able to drop into the lower to mid 40s. Not expecting fog 
formation with winds and dewpoint depression expected toward 
daybreak. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...
(Saturday through Monday)
Issued at 304 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A dry and warm trend will continue for the weekend and early next
week, as high pressure remains east of the region. High
temperatures to end the week should warm into the mid/upper 70s,
certainly a warmer change from earlier in the week. Similar 
weather is expected Sunday, and a bit warmer on Monday with highs 
in the upper 70s. Lows will remain in the mid 40s east to lower 
50s west.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Monday night through Friday)
Issued at 304 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A deep southerly flow will help bring gradually warmer air to the
region. Lows Monday night will range in the low/mid 50s and highs
in the upper 70s to near 80. 

Troughing out west will result in the development of a synoptic
scale storm system over the Western states. This system will move
to ENE, reaching the Great Lakes region by Tuesday. A cold front
and possibly new low along the front nearing the Ozarks will bring
an increase in clouds and slight chance of showers mainly Tue
afternoon. Somewhat higher chances of showers are forecast on Tue
night as this frontal boundary moves across the area. Did not see
enough instability/lift for thunder, so did not include it this
issuance. That said, a rumble or two of thunder cannot be ruled
out. Dry weather returns for the midweek as drier air filters in
from the west. High pressure moving in will be of Pacific origin,
thus not as cool for the latter half of the week. Highs near 70 on
Wednesday will warm into mid/upper 70s by end of the work week.
Another system approaching from the west will bring lower end rain
chances to end the work week. 

&&

.AVIATION...
(00Z TAFS)
Issued at 550 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR flight weather conditions are expected during the period.

&&

.HUN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AL...None.
TN...None.
&&

$$

NEAR TERM...KTW
SHORT TERM....RSB
LONG TERM....RSB
AVIATION...17
