FXUS65 KBOI 220242
AFDBOI

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Boise ID
842 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.DISCUSSION...At 8 PM MDT scattered rain showers have developed
in the Lower Treasure Valley and Weiser River Basin, but the main
pcpn and cold front were still north of our CWA. The front and 
pcpn were advancing southward as the deep upper trough carves out 
over the PacNW. Expect rain and mountain snow to cover the entire 
CWA overnight and Saturday morning, heaviest on the Idaho side. 
However, latest models have only about 3/4 as much pcpn as before.
Current forecast may be a little heavy on amounts but the trend 
looks right on. Gusty post-frontal west/northwest winds and much 
cooler temps Saturday also look just about right. Sub-freezing 
temps should arrive in the ag valleys of southwest Idaho Monday 
morning and a Freeze Warning will probably be issued with the 
early morning forecast package. No updates for now.

&&

.AVIATION...VFR conditions this evening becoming MVFR-IFR conditions 
with widespread precipitation and mountain obscuration after 
midnight as a cold front moves through. Snow levels 7000-8000ft 
this evening, lowering 4500-5500 midday Saturday. Widespread 
precipitation will taper off midday Saturday with scattered MVFR-
IFR showers during the afternoon. Winds aloft at 10kft: WSW 
40-55kt becoming NW 25-35kt by 15z/Sat and N-NW 10-20kt by 
00z/Sun. Surface winds: SW-SE 5-15kt ahead of the cold front, 
becoming W-NW 15-25kt behind the cold front, with gusts up to 35kt
Saturday afternoon. Areas of LLWS on Saturday morning.

Sunday Outlook...Generally VFR. Isolated snow showers on Sunday 
morning with areas of mountain obscuration, becoming mostly clear 
in the afternoon. Snow levels lowering to around 3000-4000ft MSL 
on Sunday morning. Surface winds NW 10-20kt.

&&

.PREV DISCUSSION...
SHORT TERM...Tonight through Sunday night...A strong upper level
trough will dig into the Intermountain West this weekend, ushering
in the first significant precipitation event in several months. A
cold front will slide across the area late tonight and through the
morning Saturday, generating strong winds that will continue
through the weekend. The strongest winds tonight and throughout
Saturday will occur mainly west and south of the Snake River
Plain, where wind gusts of up to 40 mph along and behind the cold
front are possible. Precipitation will fill in across the area 
from north to south this evening through the morning Saturday 
with the bulk of the moisture falling across southwest Idaho in 
the early morning hours. Snow levels will fall to around 4500-5000
ft by mid- day Saturday, resulting in valley rain and mountain 
snow. Conditions will destabilize Saturday afternoon, resulting in
continued showers across the area that will taper off over higher
terrain overnight into Sunday. Elevations above 4500 ft will see 
light snow accumulations of 2 inches or less while areas above 
6000 ft will see several inches of snow accumulation. Therefore, a
Winter Weather Advisory has been issued for elevations above 6000
ft across the West Central and Boise Mountains tonight through 
Sunday, where travel may be impacted by deteriorated conditions. 
Lower elevations of southeast Oregon will see rainfall totals 
ranging between 0.2-0.5 inches while the lower valleys of 
southwest Idaho will see between 0.3-0.7 inches of rain. 
Temperatures will fall roughly 10-20 degrees across the region 
behind the cold front, bottoming out on Sunday. Low temperatures 
Sunday morning will near the freezing point across parts of the 
Snake Plain, and a strong temperature gradient on Sunday afternoon
will maintain breezy conditions. The strongest winds on Sunday 
will be south and east of Boise through the Snake River Plain, 
where gusts could reach 40 mph. Conditions will briefly clear out 
Sunday evening, allowing temperatures to cool even further. Sunday
night into Monday will be the coldest morning of the forecast 
period, with sub- freezing temperatures across most lower valley 
locations including agricultural valleys.

LONG TERM...Monday through Friday...Extended models are in good 
agreement showing active weather continuing with a weak trough 
passage on Monday. This will bring mountain snow and valley rain 
showers to the area, but snow amounts should be light. Model 
agreement continues Tuesday as an upper ridge briefly builds into 
the area ahead of yet another approaching trough. Deterministic 
models and all the ensemble members now show this trough dropping
into the region Wednesday afternoon bringing another round of 
valley rains and mountain snows. This system has its origins from
the area south of Japan, so should be a fairly moist system when 
it comes into the region. At this time, late next week models 
show drier conditions as another ridge moves into the area with 
another trough approaching the Pac NW. Ensembles members all 
hinting that the flow will become more zonal (W-E flow aloft). 
So any system should be fairly fast moving. Temperatures will 
average around 5 degrees below normal. 

&&

.BOI WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
ID...Winter Weather Advisory until noon MDT Sunday IDZ011-013.
OR...None.

&&

$$

www.weather.gov/Boise
www.facebook.com/NWSBoise
www.twitter.com/NWSBoise

DISCUSSION...LC
AVIATION.....KA
PREV SHORT TERM...AL
PREV LONG TERM....CR
