FXUS65 KFGZ 232034
AFDFGZ

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Flagstaff AZ
134 PM MST Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...A storm system will continue to bring strong gusty
winds, colder temperatures, and rain and mountain snow showers
today. Fair weather returns late on Monday into Tuesday with cold
morning low temperatures. There is the possibility of another
storm system impacting the region in the second half of the work
week.

&&

.DISCUSSION...Breezy wind conditions have begun to subside for the
majority of central and northern Arizona this afternoon. With the
drop in wind speeds throughout the day, both the Wind Advisory 
and the High Wind Warning have been expired. Winds will remain 
mostly light out of the west-northwest through the rest of the
afternoon/evening hours, but an occasional breeze or two cannot be
ruled out. Aside from the winds, cool temperatures will continue 
for our CWA. With the lighter winds, clearing skies, and drier 
conditions expected tonight, a Freeze Warning has been issued. 
This Freeze Warning is valid from 9 PM MST tonight to 8 AM MST 
Monday for most elevations above 5000 feet across northern 
Arizona. 

Monday through Wednesday...Daytime highs will slowly increase
throughout mid-week, with the development of a ridge over the
Southwest. This high pressure system will allow calmer, and drier
conditions to prevail for the first half of the week. Overnight
temperatures will still be expected to dip below/near freezing for
many locations. 

Thursday onward...Another disturbance is looking to sweep through
Arizona on Thursday. This storm system could bring additional 
showers, cooler temperatures, and breezy winds for the end of the
week. Once this system moves out of our region, 
calmer/drier/warmer weather conditions should prevail. 


&&

.AVIATION...For the 00Z TAF package...Be on the lookout for isolated 
MVFR/IFR conditions in showers east of a KSOW-KRQE this evening. 
Showers ending and VFR conditions developing after midnight, lasting 
through Monday. West winds at 10-20 kts gusting 25 kts early this 
evening will diminish to 5-15 kts then shift to northwest to north 
through the night. Aviation discussion not updated for TAF 
amendments.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...Expect locally gusty northerly winds and dry weather 
on Monday, along with much colder morning low temperatures. Cold 
morning lows will continue on Tuesday but with warmer daytime 
temperatures and light winds.

Wednesday through Friday...Dry conditions and gusty southwest winds 
are forecast for Wednesday. A weather disturbance will deliver gusty 
northwest winds and a slight chance of showers on Thursday. Dry 
weather and light winds return for Friday.

&&

.FGZ WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Freeze Warning from 9 PM this evening to 8 AM MST Monday for 
AZZ004-006>017-039-040-104-106>117-139-140.

&&

$$

PUBLIC...Swenson
AVIATION...McCollum
FIRE WEATHER...McCollum

For Northern Arizona weather information visit
weather.gov/flagstaff
