FXUS65 KPSR 231742
AFDPSR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Phoenix AZ
1042 AM MST Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...Updated 18z Aviation Discussion.

&&

.SYNOPSIS...
A low pressure system will sweep a cold front through the region
today with chances for showers over higher terrain areas of 
central and eastern Arizona. Temperatures will turn much cooler 
starting today, lasting through the entire week with afternoon 
highs generally only in the 70s across the lower desert 
communities. Dry conditions are also likely to prevail through 
the coming week with only a weak weather disturbance passing by 
to the north on Thursday bringing another round of breezy winds.

&&

.DISCUSSION...
A deep upper level trough continues to track across the Western
U.S. early this morning with the center of the trough currently
tracking across Idaho into Wyoming. Farther to the south, a 
trailing shortwave trough and a cold front will push eastward
through our region today. Current objective analysis shows the
cold front is now moving through the Lower CO River Valley and
guidance shows the front quickly pushing through the majority of 
Arizona by mid morning. Gusty winds will continue to impact the 
area this morning along and ahead of the front, but with more 
limited mixing stronger gusts will be more localized. The 
advisory level winds across southeast California should 
eventually taper off over the next couple hours.

Moisture has remained quite limited across the area with PWATs
maxing out at around 0.7" across south-central Arizona. As the
cold front continues to progress eastward across Arizona this 
morning, we anticipate isolated to scattered showers staying to
the north and northeast of the Phoenix area. Some shower activity
is likely to impact the higher elevations just to the northeast
and east of the Phoenix area through the rest of the morning, but
rainfall amounts should generally be less than 0.25". 

After the cold front moves through later this morning, the rest of
the day should be quite pleasant across the area with high
temperatures only reaching into mid to possibly upper 70s across
the lower deserts. Breezy northwesterly winds will be fairly 
widespread starting mid morning with the aid of daytime mixing, 
but wind gusts should mostly stay below 25 mph across the lower 
deserts and as high as 30-35 mph across the eastern Arizona high 
terrain.

Strong subsidence and much drier air will settle into the region
on Monday as the trough exits to our east. Aside from breezy
northerly winds across the Lower CO River Valley Monday afternoon,
the day will shape up to be very nice with high temperatures in
the low to mid 70s across the lower deserts. Overnight lows Monday
night/Tuesday morning are forecast to be quite chilly with lows 
from the mid 40s to lower 50s across the lower deserts. Higher 
elevations across eastern Gila County are likely to see lows dip 
just below the freezing mark. 

Ensembles show broad upper level troughing remaining positioned 
across the Western U.S. through at least midweek with a second 
much drier shortwave trough favored to track southeastward through
the Four Corners area on Thursday. After a brief uptick in highs
on Wednesday to around 80 degrees across the south-central 
Arizona deserts to the lower 80s across southeast California, the
weak trough on Thursday should drop highs back into the upper 70s
through Friday. Looking even further out, guidance shows some 
gradual warming next weekend, but temperatures are likely to 
remain slightly below normal with no meaningful chances of precip.

&&

.AVIATION...Updated 1735Z.

South-Central Arizona including KPHX, KIWA, KSDL, and KDVT: 
Breezy winds out of the west will continue throughout the day with
some gusts near 20 kts at times. Winds will then become more
northwest to north during the evening and overnight hours and
linger into the early morning hours of Monday with speeds of 
around 10 kts. Mainly SCT low-level clouds with bases of between 
5-8 kft will prevail through this afternoon with gradual clearing 
expected through the overnight period.


Southeast California/Southwest Arizona including KIPL and KBLH: 

KIPL- Winds out of the west can be expected through this evening 
with a switch from the northwest expected during the overnight 
period. Speeds will generally be around 15 kts through this
evening and become lighter overnight, with speeds diminishing to 
less than 10 kts. Mostly clear skies expected through the period.

KBLH- Winds out the northwest can be expected through this
afternoon, with a switch from the north-northwest to north this
evening and continuing through the overnight period. Speeds will
generally range between 10-15 kts with some gusts approaching 20 
kts through this afternoon. Winds late this evening into the 
overnight are expected to increase further with some gusts as 
high as 25 kts at times. Mostly clear skies expected through the
period.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
A weather system moving through the region will bring scattered 
showers today across Arizona higher terrain areas with a 30-50% 
chance of wetting rains in Southern Gila County. Breezy conditions
and colder temperatures will also be seen today into Monday. Much
drier air will surge southward on Monday with RHs dropping to 
between 10-15% across the lower deserts. Gusty northerly winds 
between 20-30 mph and RHs 10-15% across the Lower CO River Valley 
very well could create elevated fire danger conditions Monday 
afternoon. The dry conditions will then prevail through the middle
of the week with light winds Tuesday and Wednesday. A quick 
moving mostly dry weather system may bring a return to breezy 
conditions on Thursday, particularly across the Lower CO River 
Valley. The below normal temperatures are likely to persist 
through all of this week with minRHs gradually improving to 15-25%
by Thursday. 

&&

.PSR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AZ...None.
CA...Wind Advisory until 3 PM MST this afternoon for CAZ562.

&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Kuhlman
AVIATION...Lojero
FIRE WEATHER...Kuhlman
