FXUS65 KPSR 232049
AFDPSR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Phoenix AZ
149 PM MST Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A cold front will bring cooler conditions to the region early 
this week. A warming trend is likely through Wednesday, though 
temperatures will remain below normal. Dry conditions are also 
likely to prevail through the coming week with only a weak weather
disturbance passing by to the north on Thursday bringing another 
round of breezy conditions.

&&

.DISCUSSION...
In the wake of yesterday’s storm system, temperatures across the 
region are running 10 to as much as 20 degrees lower than this 
time yesterday. Meanwhile, breezy conditions persist, as the 
pressure gradient remains tight ahead of the next short-wave 
trough to our north. A line of very light rain showers developed 
this morning across eastern Pinal/Gila County, but has since 
dissipated with the loss of synoptic ascent and instability. 
Latest CAMs do indicate showers will redevelop tonight ahead of 
the trough, though the activity will mainly be confined to 
portions of southeastern Arizona.

A cold front associated with the aforementioned trough will swing
through the area tonight. Conditions overnight will be the 
coolest in more than six months with low temperatures settling 
into the lower 50s in Phoenix and upper 40s in the outlying areas.
Strong subsidence and much drier air with dewpoints in the teens 
will settle into the region Monday as the trough departs to the 
east. With such a cool start to the day, temperatures will 
struggle to even reach the the mid 70s across the lower deserts as
a northwesterly flow provides a reinforcing shot of cool air to 
the region. Areas of light winds and dry conditions will also 
promote pockets of radiational cooling Monday night, particularly 
across the elevated valleys of eastern Gila County and a Freeze 
Warning has been issued for these locations. Elsewhere, 
temperatures may drop as low as the lower to mid 40s across the 
outlying areas of Pinal County Tuesday morning.

&&
 
.PREVIOUS DISCUSSION...
Ensembles show broad upper level troughing remaining positioned 
across the Western U.S. through at least midweek with a second 
much drier shortwave trough favored to track southeastward through
the Four Corners area on Thursday. After a brief uptick in highs
on Wednesday to around 80 degrees across the south-central 
Arizona deserts to the lower 80s across southeast California, the
weak trough on Thursday should drop highs back into the upper 70s
through Friday. Looking even further out, guidance shows some 
gradual warming next weekend, but temperatures are likely to 
remain slightly below normal with no meaningful chances of precip.

&&

.AVIATION...Updated 1735Z.

South-Central Arizona including KPHX, KIWA, KSDL, and KDVT: 
Breezy winds out of the west will continue throughout the day with
some gusts near 20 kts at times. Winds will then become more
northwest to north during the evening and overnight hours and
linger into the early morning hours of Monday with speeds of 
around 10 kts. Mainly SCT low-level clouds with bases of between 
5-8 kft will prevail through this afternoon with gradual clearing 
expected through the overnight period.

Southeast California/Southwest Arizona including KIPL and KBLH: 

KIPL- Winds out of the west can be expected through this evening 
with a switch from the northwest expected during the overnight 
period. Speeds will generally be around 15 kts through this
evening and become lighter overnight, with speeds diminishing to 
less than 10 kts. Mostly clear skies expected through the period.

KBLH- Winds out the northwest can be expected through this
afternoon, with a switch from the north-northwest to north this
evening and continuing through the overnight period. Speeds will
generally range between 10-15 kts with some gusts approaching 20 
kts through this afternoon. Winds late this evening into the 
overnight are expected to increase further with some gusts as 
high as 25 kts at times. Mostly clear skies expected through the
period.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
A weather system moving through the region will bring scattered 
showers today across Arizona higher terrain areas with a 30-50% 
chance of wetting rains in Southern Gila County. Breezy conditions
and colder temperatures will also be seen today into Monday. Much
drier air will surge southward on Monday with RHs dropping to 
between 10-15% across the lower deserts. Gusty northerly winds 
between 20-30 mph and RHs 10-15% across the Lower CO River Valley 
very well could create elevated fire danger conditions Monday 
afternoon. The dry conditions will then prevail through the middle
of the week with light winds Tuesday and Wednesday. A quick 
moving mostly dry weather system may bring a return to breezy 
conditions on Thursday, particularly across the Lower CO River 
Valley. The below normal temperatures are likely to persist 
through all of this week with minRHs gradually improving to 15-25%
by Thursday. 

&&

.PSR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AZ...Freeze Warning from midnight Monday night to 8 AM MST Tuesday 
     for AZZ563.

CA...None.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Hirsch
PREVIOUS DISCUSSION...Kuhlman
AVIATION...Lojero
FIRE WEATHER...Kuhlman
