FXUS63 KBIS 220043
AFDBIS

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Bismarck ND
Issued by National Weather Service Grand Forks ND
743 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 738 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Light rain continues to progress eastward near the international
border. Dry air in the low levels has limited widespread impacts,
however a few sites have reported light rain. No major changes to
this update as a result.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(This Evening through Saturday)
Issued at 249 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Key messages for the short term forecast are as follows:

 - Light rain is likely in northwestern and parts of north central
   ND through this evening (60% chance)

 - Cool, but seasonably mild temperatures are expected Saturday

Flow aloft is beginning to back to a west-southwesterly direction
this afternoon downstream of a rapidly-moving and intensifying 
shortwave trough approaching the Pacific Northwest. This is 
resulting in warm air advection aloft from eastern MT into western
ND, with the resultant vertical motion along a sloping frontal 
interface and related frontogenesis responsible for light rainfall
extending from southern Saskatchewan into northwestern ND. Radar 
trends and CAMs support this light rainfall gradually moving 
eastward and into north central ND through this evening. Two 
considerations and points of uncertainty with the forecast are 1) 
How far south light rainfall may occur, given some spread among 
model guidance in that regard, and 2) whether there will be any 
additional, albeit light rainfall in the north overnight and on 
Saturday. In regard to the second point, it appears that the warm 
air advection regime and related frontogenesis is being enhanced 
by a subtle shortwave trough and related jet streak, so forcing 
for ascent may decrease after 06 UTC in its wake. Many of the CAMs
composing the 12 UTC HREF portray this signal. However, at least 
broad warm air advection may continue into Saturday and at least 
some global ensemble members suggest light rain may still occur 
through that period, so we have low, 20-30% chances of light rain 
lingering in northern areas into Saturday.

On Saturday, low-level east-northeast flow will become established 
as surface low pressure organizes and deepens across the Northern
Rockies in association with the approaching and stronger upstream
trough. Boundary layer mixing will likely be limited in this setup
with southwesterly flow aloft and an inversion related to a weak 
elevated mixed layer atop that low-level, east-northeast flow. 
High clouds could also limit warming, but the difference between 
the 25th and 75th percentile of ensemble membership is only around
5 degrees F, so we chose to utilize the NBM for forecast highs. 
This means that we have highs forecast to range from the lower 50s
in northern parts of the area to the lower to middle 60s F in 
southwestern and south central ND. Southern ND is forecast to be 
dry on Saturday, even while some chance of light rain continues in
northern areas.

.LONG TERM...(Saturday Night through Friday)
Issued at 249 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Key messages for the long term forecast are:

- High confidence in windy and wet weather Sunday and Monday

- Greater uncertainty in potential snowfall, with 50% chances of 
  an inch or more of snow and only about a 15% chance of 4 or more
  inches of snowfall in western ND Sunday and Monday

We remain highly confident that a strong middle- and upper-level
trough will approach the area Sunday and then cross North Dakota
Sunday night and Monday. Global ensemble clusters favor two main
synoptic-scale scenarios with this trough: 1) A slightly faster,
less-dynamic, and open trough with less potential for overlap of
significant precipitation and cold air advection sufficient for
meaningful snowfall, and 2) An evolution into a closed low over
North Dakota, allowing for greater overlap of conditions needed to
generate accumulating snowfall. The second scenario has additional
uncertainty in exactly where the closed low would develop, with
about 15% of various global ensemble cores favoring that across
western (rather than eastern) ND. That same set of model solutions
that have a closed middle- and upper-level over western ND are the
ones favoring potential accumulations of 4+" with the event. That
is a low-probability, high-impact scenario, and the trend in NBM
4.1 probabilities is actually somewhat lower over the last 12 to
24 hours for it coming to fruition. However, it is one we will be
mindful of as a prolonged period of frontogenesis and synoptic-
scale forcing could generate localized significant snowfall given
the greater potential for stronger cold air advection and/or the
dynamic cooling of the thermal profile.

We are most-confident in an area of widespread rainfall moving
from west to east Sunday afternoon through Monday morning due to
the strong large-scale vertical motion with the trough. The odds
of any one area receiving one-half inch or more of rainfall remain
in the 40-60% range. Moreover, steep midlevel lapse rates will be
in place and enough low- and midlevel moistening will likely occur
to yield elevated bouyancy sufficient for thunderstorm potential 
in central and eastern ND Sunday and Sunday night. Even in the 
scenario with a more progressive trough passage, enough cold air 
advection may exist to generate light snowfall accumulations in 
western or perhaps central ND, with the chance of an inch of 
snowfall highest (around 50%) in far western ND and dropping off 
to around 10% in south central ND, including Bismarck/Mandan. This
too is a trend toward slightly lower probabilities of snowfall in
the last 24 hours, although as previously mentioned, there 
remains a potential scenario in which heavier snowfall could still
occur.

Strong northwest winds are also likely Sunday night and Monday 
regardless of exactly how the upper-level trough evolves. ECMWF-
based EFI guidance suggests at least a Wind Advisory will likely
be required over parts of the area as the event approaches. 

In the wake of the early-week trough, a progressive upper-air
pattern is forecast, which leads to significant differences in the
timing and amplitude of alternating shortwave trough and ridge
passages. Mean height fields will likely recover from the early-
week system, resulting in a modest warming trend, but spread in
ensembles is relatively large with temperatures next week owing to
uncertainty in the synoptic-scale details. The main theme though
will be for seasonably cool weather and only low precipitation
chances from Tuesday through Friday.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday Evening)
Issued at 738 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR to MVFR cigs will prevail over the TAF period. The primary
aviation impacts will be pockets of -RA in the vicinity of MOT and
XWA. Winds will generally be light and variable before settling
on a northeasterly direction tomorrow morning. MVFR cigs are most
likely to occur at XWA and MOT, with all other sites remaining
VFR.


&&

.BIS WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

UPDATE...FGF
SHORT TERM...CJS
LONG TERM...CJS
AVIATION...FGF
