FXUS64 KSHV 212358
AFDSHV

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Shreveport LA
658 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...New AVIATION...

.SHORT TERM...
(This evening through Sunday Night) 
Issued at 235 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

The latest mid-level analysis indicates a ridge axis with a broad 
area of dry air centered over the ArkLaMiss with more of a zonal,
westerly flow to the west in Texas and northerly flow to the east
of the ArkLaMiss. At the surface, a low pressure trough extends 
from the Upper Midwest southwestward into the OK/TX panhandles. 
Meanwhile, a broad area of high pressure extends from the Gulf of 
Mexico northeastward across the eastern U.S. A deep layer of dry 
air remains in place throughout the atmospheric column aloft. 
GOES-16 satellite imagery this morning indicates that some
scattered diurnal cumulus have developed in central Louisiana with
clear skies otherwise. 

There is ECMWF/NAM/GFS agreement that the mid-level ridge will slide 
east of the area tonight into Saturday with a more zonal pattern for 
our area on Saturday night into Sunday on the northern periphery of 
a ridge over the western Gulf and Bay of Campeche. In this pattern, 
along with a deep layer of dry air, a dry forecast remains in place 
through this period. One change will be that there may be enough
increasing low-level moisture for diurnally-driven cumulus clouds
to develop each day. The surface pressure pattern with a 
tightened pressure gradient between the high southeast of the area
and a developing low across the central Plains will lend to 
increasing wind gusts late Saturday/Sunday mornings into the early
evening hours each day. Southerly winds at 15-20 mph with gusts 
to 25-30 mph can be expected in the afternoon hours this weekend. 
This is sitting just below the minimum Wind Advisory criteria of 
20 mph sustained winds, so we will need to monitor this. For now, 
winds are predicted to remain just below criteria. 

For temperatures, while we may see some diurnal cumulus clouds
develop, we will continue to have abundant sunshine with a 
southerly low-level flow allowing for a warm weekend with highs 
in the mid 80s across the area each day. For lows, increasing dew 
points with keep up temps in the low to mid 60s tonight through 
Sunday night. /04-Woodrum/

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Monday through next Thursday) 
Issued at 235 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A more active period of weather is anticipated late Monday into 
Tuesday with the most rainfall for the area in nearly a month and a 
half. Over the last 24-36 hours, NAEFS/ECMWF ensemble solutions have 
come into more alignment with resolving a deep trough across the 
western U.S. and swinging it into the southern Plains Monday into
Monday night. Models are also aligned with the placement of a 
closed low developing over the TX/OK border by Tuesday. There is 
model agreement that this closed low will be quite vigorous and will
swing from the southern Plains into the Missouri Valley on 
Tuesday before pulling well northeast of the area on Wednesday. 
This pattern will put the ArkLaTex in a southwesterly flow ahead 
of the system on Monday with a chance of showers ahead of the 
system. 

A cold front will bring the majority of rainfall with the system 
Monday night into Tuesday across the area. An area of showers and 
thunderstorms are expected with rainfall chances increasing to 
likely in East Texas and southeastern Oklahoma on Monday night. 
The remainder of the area will see likely rainfall chances early 
on Tuesday as the upper low makes its closest approach and the 
cold front crosses the area. While there is strong forcing for 
ascent with this system and strong shear, instability is weak as 
it crosses our area Monday night into Tuesday. Right now, this 
timing appears to limit the development of strong to severe 
thunderstorms with this system over our area, however we cannot 
complete rule out this threat given the strength of the upper 
level system. This will be worth watching closely as it gets 
closer in the forecast. If the system trends slower this could 
evolve into more of a severe weather event for our area on 
Tuesday. Beyond the upper low, high pressure will build into the 
area on Wednesday and Thursday, drying the forecast out across the
region. 

One fly in the ointment with the aforementioned system early next 
week will be moisture advection from Tropical Storm Roslyn, 
currently in the eastern Pacific Ocean. The system will weaken as
it pushes into Mexico by Monday, but lingering moisture from this
system could advect into Texas and help increase rainfall amounts
for our area Monday night into Tuesday. For now, about an inch of
rain is expected across much of the area with up to two inches of
rain possible for portions of northeast Texas, southeastern 
Oklahoma, and southwestern Arkansas. 

For temperatures, given the model ensemble consensus, the National 
Blend of Models (NBM) was used. Highs on Monday ahead of the 
front will be in the upper 70s to lower 80s across the area. On 
Tuesday, highs will range from the upper 70s in central Louisiana
to the upper 60s in southeastern Oklahoma. Wednesday should be 
the coolest day next week for most locations with highs ranging 
from the upper 60s in southeastern OK to the mid 70s in Deep East 
Texas and central Louisiana. On Thursday, warmer temperatures will
return, ranging from the lower 70s in SE OK to the upper 70s in 
Deep East Texas and central Louisiana. /04-Woodrum/

&&

.AVIATION...
(00Z TAFS)
Issued at 639 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

For the ArkLaTex terminals, VFR through the coming wknd. Tonight 
gusts have slacked, but sustained will keep around 10KT overnight
with the pressure gradient tightening up from a sfc low forming 
in the lee of the Rockies with a trough buckling the jet stream 
around a deepening upper low over the NW U.S. Our sfc gusts will 
resume by 15Z with sustained speeds increasing from 10-15KT up to
16-21KT w/ gusts 21-32KT. Little change for Sun in this slow movg
LaNina pattern w/ our next stormy fropa late Mon/early Tues. /24/

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 1150 AM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

With a deep layer of dry air in place and little rainfall since
early September, our fuel dryness levels are getting critical,
particularly in Northeast Texas and southeastern Oklahoma. With
this in mind along with fires reported this week in McCurtain
County, OK, we coordinated the issuance of a Fire Danger Statement
earlier today with the Oklahoma Forestry Services and Texas A&M 
Forest Service offices. Relative humidity values will be just 
above critical Red Flag Warning criteria in the 25-30 percent 
range with winds below critical values in the 10-15 mph range with
gusts to 20-25 mph. While we anticipate slightly higher RH values
tomorrow, winds will be stronger with 15-20 mph sustained and 
gusts to 25-30 mph. With that in mind, a Fire Danger Statement may
be needed again on Saturday and possibly again on Sunday. 
/04-Woodrum/

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
SHV  63  84  65  85 /   0   0   0   0 
MLU  59  83  61  84 /   0   0   0   0 
DEQ  56  85  62  86 /   0   0   0   0 
TXK  63  83  65  84 /   0   0   0   0 
ELD  58  81  60  83 /   0   0   0   0 
TYR  64  85  66  86 /   0   0   0   0 
GGG  61  84  64  85 /   0   0   0   0 
LFK  61  85  64  85 /   0   0   0   0 

&&

.SHV WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AR...None.
LA...None.
OK...None.
TX...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...04
LONG TERM....04
AVIATION...24
