FXUS64 KLCH 212349
AFDLCH

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Lake Charles LA
649 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...New AVIATION...

.SHORT TERM...
(This evening through Saturday)
Issued at 151 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Seasonably warm day ongoing with temps in the 80s and dewpoints 
in the 60s. Sustained winds are near 10-15MPH with gusts of up to 
25 in some areas. These winds will be similar to this day after 
day. There is a surface high pressure over the southeast states 
with an upper trough over western Canada. Going through the next 
few days, that will dig across the Pacific NW. Flow over us will 
remain mostly zonal up until the end of the forecast period with 
the approaching front.

With exception to lows, temps will be a near carbon copy day after
day. Highs across the board will be in the low to mid 80s. Lows
will start off in the upper 50s and warm to the mid 60s near the
end of this period. Dewpoints will be rising a few degrees with a
steady southerly flow streaming gulf moisture into the area. Look
for no rain but more clouds for the rest of the short term.
Stigger/87

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Saturday night through next Thursday)
Issued at 151 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A progressive pattern will be in place through the long term period, 
as a couple of longwave trough systems move through the region. 
These two systems and their associated surface fronts will boost 
rain chances early in the week and again on Friday.
Temperatures following the two fronts will be cooler (but not 
exceptionally cold like earlier this week). 

As the week begins, moisture will be increasing across the region 
amid deepening southerly flow in the lower levels the will veer more 
southwesterly aloft. PWATs are progged to increase to near 2 inches 
by Monday night as the remnants/moisture of E Pacific TC Roslyn lift 
northeast across Mexico and merge into a larger trough sliding east 
across the southern Rockies. As this occurs, surface low pressure 
will develop across N Texas, enhancing southerly winds across the 
area. The combination of deep moisture, surface convergence and 
forcing associated with the upper trough will produce increasing 
showers and thunderstorms from west to east from late Monday into 
Tuesday. The best rain chances are expected during the day Tuesday 
as the front moves east across the CWA. At this time, the risk for 
any severe storms appears low as instability/buoyancy will be 
limited, despite relatively strong ascent associated with the trough 
and modest deep layer shear. 

Behind the front, cool and dry high pressure will build over the 
region, with dry weather expected from Tuesday night through 
Thursday. Overnight temperatures will be cool Tuesday and Wednesday 
nights, with lows falling into the upper 40s to lower 50s (slightly 
below normal for this time of year). Meanwhile, afternoons will be 
mild with highs in the 70s. 

A warming trend will develop by the end of the week as the surface 
high moves east and southerly flow returns. The next longwave trough 
upstream will be crossing the southern Rockies and quickly 
progressing into TX. Model spread begins to increase at this point 
of the forecast, resulting in increased uncertainty regarding timing 
of PoPs as well as QPF amounts. A general consensus suggests 
increasing PoPs on Friday, and the deterministic NBM reflects this 
thinking with a gradual increase in PoPs from west to east Friday 
(20-35 percent).

&&

.AVIATION...
(00Z TAFS)
Issued at 646 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Moderate winds during the eve into the overnight hours clouds to
spread inland from the coast becoming cloudy by late morning
hours. VFR all taf lctns thru this fcst cycle.

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 151 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Moderate onshore flow has developed and will prevail through the 
weekend as high pressure meanders east of the region. The next 
frontal system will begin developing in the Midwest over the 
weekend, causing winds and seas to increase in the coming days. 
Exercise Caution conditions may develop as early as tonight with 
Small Craft Advisories possibly needed for coastal waters late in 
the weekend. 

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
AEX  58  85  61  85 /   0   0   0   0 
LCH  62  81  64  82 /   0   0   0  10 
LFT  60  82  63  83 /   0   0   0   0 
BPT  64  82  67  83 /   0   0  10  10 

&&

.LCH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
LA...None.
TX...None.
GM...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...87
LONG TERM....24
AVIATION...19
