FXUS61 KBTV 231731
AFDBTV

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Burlington VT
131 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Another beautiful fall day is expected today over the North
Country before an approaching coastal low brings rain showers to
portions of Vermont Sunday night into Monday morning. These 
rain showers will come to an end by Monday evening. Once this
system exits the area, additional rain chances linger into the
middle of the week with a continuation of above normal
temperatures expected.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 111 PM EDT Sunday...Some small adjustments to PoPs through
18Z Monday, with highest PoPs in eastern VT, primarily east of
the Green Mountains. This will be the area of thickest cloud
cover as well, though it could stretch west into northern New
York. Blended some models to get an updated look at the winds 
and gusts, and massaged temperatures into observations.Otherwise,
forecast generally on track. Previous discussion below:

Previous Discussion...Only minor tweaks with this update
with quiet weather today under high pressure and a dry
atmosphere. Continued with minimal PoPs through 00Z Monday and
adjusted sky cover ever so slightly to better align with current
observations and satellite with clouds increasing from the
southeast throughout the day. Temperatures are continuing their
slow ascent this morning, and we still anticipate highs in the
upper 60s for those in the broad valleys. Previous discussion
below:

One last widespread dry day is in store for the area today 
before an approaching low brings a return of precipitation 
chances tonight. Before the system approaches, expect light 
winds today with comfortable highs in the low to upper 60s. Our 
NY counties will start off the day with a good amount of sun, 
but further east high and mid-level clouds will continue to 
spread over Vermont from the south ahead of an approaching 
coastal low. Through the day today, this coastal low, located 
off the Mid-Atlantic Coast, will advance northward and send an 
inverted trough north into southern New England. Model consensus
still remains that we stay dry into this evening, but expect 
precipitation to spread into parts of our area from south to 
north Sunday night. There has been a westward shift in latest 
guidance with regards to the western periphery of the 
precipitation shield that will spread over New England Sunday 
night, thus forecast has changed a touch for our CWA for Sunday 
night/Monday morning. As easterly flow north of the low pressure
system strengthens over Vermont Monday morning, expect a push 
of onshore Atlantic moisture from the east/southeast. This 
scenario will favor rain spreading into much of eastern Vermont 
Monday morning, locally enhanced along the eastern slopes of the
Green Mountains. Just how far west this rain reaches past the 
Green Mountains is still a bit of a forecast challenge, but 
thinking the Champlain Valley will only see a few hundredths of 
an inch of precipitation total due to downsloping west of the 
Greens. Meanwhile, east of the Greens we've upped precipitation 
chances slightly and upped total QPF amounts to the one to three
tenths of an inch range. Rain showers will quickly come to an 
end Monday afternoon as the remnants of the low are quickly 
carried off to our northeast. All said and done, this system 
looks to mainly just impact Vermont, and we continue to carry a 
mainly dry forecast further west over our northern NY counties 
for Sunday night into Monday.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH TUESDAY NIGHT/...
As of 322 AM EDT Sunday...The bulk of any lingering showers will wind
down early Monday night as the deepest moisture pulls away to our
east and ridging starts to build over the region. However, ample low
level moisture, streaming northward on south/southeast flow, will
become entrenched under the subsidence inversion. Hence, expect
clouds and drizzle will linger overnight into Tuesday, especially
across southern/eastern VT. Northern NY, furthest removed from the
tropical moisture, should see at least some clearing skies Monday
night and sunshine on Tuesday. Those areas that do clear out
overnight could cool down into the lower 40s, otherwise mid 40s to
around 50 will be common. Tuesday's temperatures will warm back into
the mid 60s to around 70, though areas east of the Greens could be a
bit cooler if cloud cover persists longer than currently
anticipated. Tuesday night, we'll remain positioned between an
incoming upper trough and broad ridging to our east. Areas east of
the Greens will likely see another round of cloudiness, while from
the Champlain Valley westward should have partly to mostly clear
skies. A relatively mild night is expected with temperatures
remaining in the mid 40s to lower 50s.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH SATURDAY/...
As of 322 AM EDT Sunday...Still some uncertainty for mid week as
model solutions still differ on how low pressure that is currently
located well east of Bermuda will develop and move. Consensus is to
lift it out to the north and east, remaining well south of Nova
Scotia, through Thu/Fri. The latest GFS, however, has it meandering
off the East Coast lifts it toward the 40N/70W benchmark by Friday,
before shunting it east just to the south of Nova Scotia on
Saturday. Regardless, this feature will keep the best moisture
located off to our east as an upper shortwave and cold front cross
our region Wednesday night and Thursday. So while showers are
expected to develop midweek, don't expect widespread precipitation
at this time. Much of Wednesday will be dry, then showers will move
in from west to east late in the day and overnight as the upper
trough swings across, followed by the cold front early Thursday.
South/southwest flow ahead of these features will result in another
warm day on Wednesday, with temperatures once again warming well
into the 60s and some locations likely breaking the 70F mark.
Showers will wind down during the day Thursday as drier and cooler
air works in behind the front. Highs Thursday will generally be in
the mid/upper 50s in the north, and lower/mid 60s central/southern
sections. High pressure will settle over the region Friday and
Saturday, leading to dry weather. Temperatures will be near/slightly
above normal, generally in the mid/upper 50s for highs and lower/mid
30s for lows.

&&

.AVIATION /17Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Through 18Z Monday...VFR conditions continue through 06Z Monday
for all sites, and high clouds continue to lower as we head 
into the evening. MVFR ceilings are expected to arrive at KMPV
and KRUT first, around 06-07Z as a coastal storm shifts into the
region from the southeast. KSLK and KEFK will be next for MVFR
ceilings around 12Z, while KBTV and KPBG will likely hold off
until around 15Z for MVFR ceilings due to overall easterly flow
against the Green Mountains. Clouds should remain fairly low but
breaking up throughout the day Monday to more scattered coverage.
KMSS is far enough northwest from the coastal low pressure to 
remain VFR for the entire 24 hour period.

Showers associated with the coastal storm could bring
visibilities to 5SM at some sites, but it's with any convective
elements, visibilities could drop more briefly. In contrast, the
showers could end up being relatively light with thin/light
raindrops, allowing for the visibilities to remain P6SM. We'll
continue to monitor this as the event gets closer. Surface winds
will generally be light and variable throughout the period, and
LLWS in eastern Vermont is possible but not likely.

Outlook...

Monday Night: Mainly VFR, with local IFR possible. Slight chance
SHRA, Patchy DZ.
Tuesday: Mainly VFR, with local IFR possible. NO SIG WX.
Tuesday Night: Mainly VFR, with local IFR possible. NO SIG WX.
Wednesday: MVFR/IFR conditions possible. Chance SHRA.
Wednesday Night: Mainly MVFR, with local IFR possible. Chance
SHRA.
Thursday: Mainly MVFR, with local VFR possible. Slight chance
SHRA.
Thursday Night: VFR. NO SIG WX.
Friday: VFR. NO SIG WX.

&&

.BTV WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
VT...None.
NY...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Duell
NEAR TERM...Duell/Storm
SHORT TERM...Hastings
LONG TERM...Hastings
AVIATION...Storm
