FXUS61 KBTV 231928
AFDBTV

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Burlington VT
328 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
An approaching coastal low pressure is expected to bring rain 
showers to portions of Vermont tonight into tomorrow morning. These 
rain showers will diminish Monday evening, turning to more drizzle 
and clouds lingering Monday night. Once this system exits the area, 
additional rain chances linger into the middle of the week with a 
continuation of above normal temperatures expected. Dry and warmer 
weather is expected for the end of the week into the weekend.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY NIGHT/...
As of 326 PM EDT Sunday...High clouds continue to flow through the
forecast area from the south ahead of a coastal low pressure system
and inverted trough this afternoon. Clouds will continue to thicken
and generally increase from the southeast through the evening.
Showers are expected to begin in south-central Vermont this evening,
then precip moves northward throughout the night tonight. Showers
are forecast to run throughout the day Monday. Models have been
flip-flopping about QPF over the past few runs, so despite the
westward shift, we are not enthusiastic about lots of rain. Going
with 0.30-0.50 of an inch total at the most for south-central
Vermont, which will be closest to the center of the storm. The rest
of Vermont could be in the 0.20-0.30 range, with 0.10-0.20 of an
inch in the Champlain Valley and dry air aloft potentially cutting
these totals down even more. There could be convective elements to
this system though, so QPF will likely be highly variable and even
terrain-driven. Much of the Champlain Valley could be sheltered from
the brunt of the rain by the Green Mountains with overall easterly
flow. Regardless, highest chances of rain will be eastern and
central Vermont due to the projected northeasterly curved path of
the system, with PoPs in the 60-80% range. Winds won't be a huge
concern with this event, as the highest winds will stay well above
the surface and saturated soundings won't leave much room for
mixing. Lows Sunday night will be mild in the upper 40s to lower 50s
with the cloud cover.

As the low begins to shift away from the region, northern New York
could get some clearing skies and more pleasant weather with highs
in the upper 60s. Elsewhere, temperatures will max out in the lower
to mid-60s at most on Monday. While this will be a slight cooldown
from Sunday with cloudy and rainy weather, it'll still be 5-10
degrees above average. Showers will wind down Monday night as the
main moisture moves eastward, replaced by ridging and drier air in
the upper levels. A subsidence inversion could trap some of the
moisture in the lower levels, however, under south-southeast flow,
indicating some clouds and drizzle overnight under high pressure.
Lows may be even milder Monday night with such thick moisture 
in the lower 50s with a couple of upper 40s here and there.

&&

.SHORT TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH TUESDAY NIGHT/...
As of 326 PM EDT Sunday...As surface high pressure remains centered
over the northern Atlantic Ocean on Tuesday and low pressure over
the central Atlantic drifts towards the mid-Atlantic coast, a
continued easterly low level flow will keep air saturated near the
surface east of the Green Mountains. Depth of moisture based on
model relative humidity guidance generally thins with somewhat of
the one to three thousand feet and is variable through time and
space, but general idea for low clouds to hang tough in eastern
Vermont looks good. As such, these areas will have a small diurnal
range in temperature with mild night and relatively cool day, and
tend to have occasional drizzle or light showers, too. Then Tuesday
night, as the aforementioned Atlantic Ocean low pressure area lifts
closer to our area, greater chances of light showers along with
thickening clouds will be encouraged by a stronger easterly
component to the wind. As such, have continued to include some
patchy drizzle Tuesday morning, and added additional areas of fog
Tuesday night generally in the upslope southeasterly portions of our
region's Adirondack and Green Mountains. Any measurable rain during
this period (likely 0.1" or less) will tend to be confined to those
same upslope areas. Showers that push northwestward will tend to
peter out farther west given the downsloping off the Greens, and
where moisture depth thins, expect skies to become partially clear.

As such, we will tap into the unseasonably warm air mass aloft and
temperatures yet again will be well above normal, especially where
dry adiabatic lapse rates are favored in downsloping locations.
Highs will easily reach the 60s and low 70s as anomalously warm air
aloft is in place (near 12 degrees Celsius at 850 millibars is near
the the 99th climatological percentile per NAEFS 00Z 23-October).
Latest MOS, especially European MOS which often does well in warm
air masses, shows much of our lower elevation sites peaking in the
low to mid 70s. While warm, record highs are not expected as the
daily high temperature records at our climate sites were set in 1963
and in the 78 to 80 range. However, our very mild and moist air mass
combined with an expected stratus layer/lack of widespread rain
Tuesday morning and night will support some potential record warm
minimum temperatures both on Tuesday and the following day.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
As of 326 PM EDT Sunday...Main impact weather looks like during the
Wednesday - Thursday time frame, with showers and winds associated
with another ocean low pressure system and passage of a cold front
from the west. Still questions on how widespread rainfall will be,
as the weak surface low over the western Atlantic out ahead of the
front will shunt richer moisture to our east as it passes to our
northeast. However, between that ocean system impacting eastern
areas and the expected strength of the front, it looks like at least
some rain along with moderate winds will occur across the region.
Latest six hour probability of precipitation has increased over the
last 12 to 24 hours and supports high chance/low likely category.
Timing is mainly Wednesday evening and night with latest model
guidance, which has trended a little slower versus the NBM. Heavier
and longer duration rain is favored in southern Canada based on the
track of the surface low well to our north and relative lack of
forcing for ascent in our region, so a subtly greater chance of rain
is noted in the St. Lawrence Valley and near the International
Border. As far as the wind, a widespread northwesterly post-frontal
wind on Thursday is expected, peaking Thursday morning in the
northern Adirondacks and Champlain Valley with gusts near 25 MPH
before gradually subsiding. Temperatures will sharply cool compared
to Tuesday and Wednesday, but still be above normal with highs
mainly in the 55 to 63 range.

Quiet conditions look to then build for most if not all of the
remainder of the period as a large high pressure area builds into
the region. A split flow upper level pattern should keep moisture
well to our south as weak shortwave energy passes through our region
at times, so while clouds can be expected occasionally,
precipitation chances are just about nil Thursday night through
Sunday. With the aforementioned weather pattern, air of Pacific
origin will be present so temperatures will be on the mild side,
near or a few degrees above normal with highs in the 50s and lows in
the 30s.

&&

.AVIATION /20Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Through 18Z Monday...VFR conditions continue through 06Z Monday
for all sites, and high clouds continue to lower as we head 
into the evening. MVFR ceilings are expected to arrive at KMPV
and KRUT first, around 06-07Z as a coastal storm shifts into the
region from the southeast. KSLK and KEFK will be next for MVFR
ceilings around 12Z, while KBTV and KPBG will likely hold off
until around 15Z for MVFR ceilings due to overall easterly flow
against the Green Mountains. Clouds should remain fairly low but
breaking up throughout the day Monday to more scattered coverage.
KMSS is far enough northwest from the coastal low pressure to 
remain VFR for the entire 24 hour period.

Showers associated with the coastal storm could bring
visibilities to 5SM at some sites, but it's with any convective
elements, visibilities could drop more briefly. In contrast, the
showers could end up being relatively light with thin/light
raindrops, allowing for the visibilities to remain P6SM. We'll
continue to monitor this as the event gets closer. Surface winds
will generally be light and variable throughout the period, and
LLWS in eastern Vermont is possible but not likely.

Outlook...

Monday Night: Mainly VFR, with local IFR possible. Slight chance
SHRA, Patchy DZ.
Tuesday: Mainly VFR, with local IFR possible. NO SIG WX.
Tuesday Night: Mainly VFR, with local IFR possible. NO SIG WX.
Wednesday: MVFR/IFR conditions possible. Chance SHRA.
Wednesday Night: Mainly MVFR, with local IFR possible. Chance
SHRA.
Thursday: Mainly MVFR, with local VFR possible. Slight chance
SHRA.
Thursday Night: VFR. NO SIG WX.
Friday: VFR. NO SIG WX.

&&

.BTV WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
VT...None.
NY...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Storm
NEAR TERM...Storm
SHORT TERM...Kutikoff
LONG TERM...Kutikoff
AVIATION...Storm
