FXUS61 KRNK 212353
AFDRNK

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Blacksburg VA
753 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Warming temperatures and dry conditions look to continue through 
Saturday as high pressure moves across our region. By Sunday, 
low pressure will track along the North Carolina and Virginia 
coasts bringing extra clouds along with a few showers to eastern
Virginia. Most of our region will remain dry with high pressure
returning early next week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY/...
As of 140 PM EDT Friday...

     Dry and warm weather will prevail through Saturday... 

Quiet weather for the near term forecast with high pressure in 
control. This high will remain along the Appalachians this weekend 
as upper level ridging builds in. Tonight, the surface high will be 
directly overhead. This subsidence will help keep winds calm and 
skies clear, with a similar moisture profile to last night. Thus 
undercut guidance a couple degrees to be more similar to last 
night's temperatures in the low to upper 30s, with cooler valleys 
and warmer ridges. 

An area of low pressure over the Bahamas will become more 
organized but make little progress through Saturday. We will 
probably see some increase in cirrus clouds over parts of NC and
VA from this system by Saturday night. Otherwise, expect mostly 
sunny skies during the day. Temperatures Saturday will range 
from the upper 50s to the upper 60s with light easterly winds. 

Forecast confidence is high through the near term.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SATURDAY NIGHT THROUGH MONDAY NIGHT/...
As of 130 PM EDT Friday...

High pressure will remain on control over the weekend and into
early next week as upper level ridging begins to build. 
Southwest flow also begins to increase ahead of a strong low 
pressure system expected to develop over the Central Plains by 
Sunday. This should at least allow afternoon temperatures to 
rise into mid/upper 60s for most locations outside of the 
highest elevations. 

Weak upper low will lift north along the Atlantic coast during
the day Sunday, which could increase some clouds in the far 
east (i.e locations east of Route 29). At the moment, not 
expecting any rain any rain this far west, with the bulk of the 
rain staying along the coast.

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 145 PM EDT Friday...

Models have come into better agreement in the long term for the
next expected system. Ridging and southwest flow holds through
mid-week ahead of a trough digging into the Southern Plains. 
The timing of the front looks slower with low pressure 
development along it. The cold front reaches the Ohio Valley by 
Wednesday and East Coast by Thursday. A moisture starved frontal
boundary seems to be the most likely scenario at this time, so 
have only kept some slight chances, mainly for the mountains.

Temperatures remain above average ahead of the front, cooling 
slightly by the end of next week.

&&

.AVIATION /00Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
As of 745 PM EDT Friday...

...VFR Conditions Expected Through the TAF Valid Period...

Synopsis: A ridge of high pressure at the surface was centered
over Virginia stretching northeast to southwest from the state.
The surface high will gradually drift toward the coast Saturday.
Aloft, a trough of low pressure was weakening just to the east
of the region while a strong ridge of high pressure aloft was
building into the region from the MidSouth/Southeast U.S. SCT
Cirrus are expected through the TAF Valid period, but otherwise
skies will remain mostly clear. The liklihood of early morning
fog is limited given the dry surface air mass with dewpoints in
the 20s and 30s. However, some river valley induced fog will be
possible in a few locations.

Ceilings...VFR through the TAF valid period outside of the
remote possibility of a brief period of BR/FG in the 10Z-13Z
time frame Saturday morning in river valleys mainly west of the
Blue Ridge.

Visibilities...VFR through the TAF valid period outside of the
remote possibility of a brief period of IFR-LIFR BR/FG in the
10Z-13Z time frame Saturday morning in river valleys mainly west
of the Blue Ridge.

Winds...Highly variable in direction through the TAF valid
period but speeds are expected to remain at-or-below 8kts.
General direction will favor SW-NW overnight and NE-SE from
after 15Z Saturday morning.

/Confidence Levels in Forecast Parameters/
- High Confidence in Ceilings,
- High Confidence in Visibilities, except Moderate 10Z-13Z
  Saturday due to potential fog development river valleys,
- Low Confidence in Wind Direction,
- High Confidence in Wind Speed.

Extended Aviation Discussion...  

VFR conditions will prevail for the most part Sunday through
Tuesday. An upper-level trough and associated frontal system
will skirt the region from the west/northwest by Wednesday or
Thursday with a few showers possible mainly west of the Blue
Ridge. Late night/early morning fog will become increasingly
likely toward early next week, but otherwise mainly VFR
conditions are expected through the period with no major weather
systems expected to dominate or impact the area.

&&

.RNK WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
VA...None.
NC...None.
WV...None.

&&

$$

SYNOPSIS...ET/SH
NEAR TERM...SH
SHORT TERM...BMG
LONG TERM...BMG
AVIATION...RAB
