FXUS63 KLSX 231946
AFDLSX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Saint Louis MO
246 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM... (Through Late Tuesday Night) 
Issued at 244 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The main focus for this portion of the forecast period is on the 
widespread, soaking rain expected early this week.  

Current water vapor imagery shows a deepening trough over the 
Intermountain West with a shortwave ejecting out over the Northern 
Plains. A deepening surface low associated with this shortwave is 
currently located across the Central and Northern Plains per latest 
surface obs, and is responsible for the tight pressure gradient and 
resulting gusty winds over our CWA. This southerly to southwesterly 
low-level flow will continue to advect warm, moist air into the 
region ahead of a cold front associated with the surface low. This 
increase in moisture and weak forcing aloft has kept an area of mid-
level-based isolated to scattered showers and thunderstorms going 
from this morning into this afternoon primarily across central and 
northeastern Missouri. Over the next couple of hours, this 
convection will likely carry into west-central Illinois before 
dissipating closer to sunset. I can't rule out a stray shower or 
thunderstorm elsewhere, but most locations will stay dry through 
today into tonight. 

Tomorrow, the aforementioned trough will eject out into the Great 
Plains as the cold front approaches the Middle Mississippi Valley. 
Southerly low-level flow will continue to advect moisture into the 
region ahead of the front, leading to increasing cloud cover that 
will pair with decreasing mid- and low-level temperatures to keep 
surface temperatures somewhat cooler than their weekend levels, but 
still on the warm side of climatology. Confidence is highest in this 
occurring west of the Mississippi River in Missouri where better 
pooling of moisture is likely and ensemble spread in temperatures is 
low. Confidence is lower east of the Mississippi River in Illinois 
where cloud cover may not be as dense and therefore ensemble spread 
is a little higher. The going forecast represents what I think will 
be the warmest temperatures get tomorrow, and I can't rule out 
needing to bump values down if confidence increases in denser cloud 
cover. 

Monday evening into the overnight hours, the front and associated 
rainfall will make its way into the CWA as the trough draws nearer. 
Rain along and behind the front will fall mainly across central and 
northeastern Missouri into west-central Illinois as a surface low 
develops across the Southern Plains. Guidance has begun to converge 
on a solution where this low moves northeastward along the front 
toward the Middle Mississippi Valley and over the CWA as a shortwave 
within the base of the trough pivots northeastward. As this low 
moves over the region, rain coverage will ramp up early Tuesday, 
with the greatest focus for rain now across eastern Missouri and 
southwestern Illinois. Low amounts of instability (100-200 J/kg of 
MUCAPE) are expected to be present ahead of the low in southeastern 
Missouri and southwestern Illinois, where embedded thunderstorms are 
possible. Ensemble guidance has greater probabilities of higher 
MUCAPE (> 500 J/kg) well south of the area, leading to low 
confidence in strong to severe thunderstorms. The low will slowly 
exit the CWA on Tuesday, with rain chances ending from east to west 
through the latter part of the day. 

Ensemble- and probabilistic-based guidance has the focus for the 
greatest rainfall amounts oriented in a southwest-to-northeast band 
roughly along the I-44 corridor in Missouri and I-55 corridor in 
Illinois. Here, confidence is high in roughly 2" of rain with 
locally higher amounts possible. Elsewhere in the CWA, 1-1.5" is 
expected. Low water levels in area rivers and streams and dry soils 
are expected to easily handle this amount of rainfall, which will 
likely take the edge off of the local drought conditions. 

Also of note on Tuesday with the passage of the front will be a 
return of normal to below normal temperatures. Low-level 
northeasterly flow behind the front will advect in a notably cooler 
airmass, with temperatures on Tuesday afternoon expected to top out 
nearly 10 degrees below normal in portions of the area.  

Elmore

.LONG TERM... (Wednesday through Next Sunday) 
Issued at 244 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The main focus for this portion of the period is on seasonable 
temperatures and late-week rain chances. 

On Wednesday, the trough responsible for our early-week weather 
will be departing the region to the east, with the surface low 
continuing to push to the northeast. If the low is slower to depart 
as some guidance suggests, we could see some lingering showers 
primarily in our Illinois counties early Wednesday, but confidence 
is higher in a dry day. 

In the wake of the trough, southwesterly flow will quickly 
reestablish itself over the Middle Mississippi Valley. At the 
surface, an area of high pressure will shift into the Midwest and 
Great Lakes and become anchored through the end of the workweek, 
keeping surface flow northerly to easterly. This will help hold 
temperatures around climatological normals per ensemble means, and 
little ensemble spread in temperatures creates high confidence in 
this scenario. 

Late week into the weekend, guidance consensus is that an upper-
level trough will deepen across the western CONUS and eject out into 
the Great Plains. However, there is much variability on the phasing 
of this trough and whether it becomes cut off, forming a closed low 
that meanders across the central CONUS through the weekend. This 
creates a lot of uncertainty with rain chances from Friday through 
Sunday. One of two more likely scenarios is that the trough or cut-
off low passes far enough south and the surface high remains in 
place, limiting moisture return and keeping forcing further 
southward away from the CWA, leading to a mostly dry weekend. The 
other likely scenario is that the trough or cut-off low tracks 
further north and the surface high retreats more to the northeast, 
allowing for at least some moisture to return to the area amidst 
better upper-level forcing, opening the door to rounds of light 
rainfall through the weekend. Given the lead time and amount of 
spread among ensemble guidance at this range, I don't have 
confidence in either solution, and the current NBM init/forecast 
represents the middle ground. 

Elmore

&&

.AVIATION...  (For the 18z TAFs through 18z Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 1215 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR flight conditions are expected to prevail at all local
terminals through the forecast period. Southerly flow is
increasing moisture across the region, leading to an increase in
cloud cover and some spotty showers. Some of these showers have
recently developed in the vicinity of KCOU and KJEF, and are
expected to be short lived. If they do continue on, VCSH may need
to be added to KUIN this afternoon, but confidence currently is
higher in a dry forecast at this terminal. If showers are to 
impact any local terminals, a brief drop to low VFR visibilities 
and possibly high MVFR visibilities is possible. I also can't rule
out a rumble of thunder with this convection, but confidence in 
that is very low at the moment. Winds will weaken slightly 
tonight, but likely not enough to lead to notable, widespread low-
level wind shear developing as the low-level jet continues 
overhead tonight. Therefore, we've removed LLWS from the TAFs, but
will continue to monitor for the potential of LLWS. A front 
approaches the area tomorrow, and moisture pooling along it will 
lead to an increase in cloud cover and a decrease in cloud 
heights. These lower clouds will impact KCOU, KJEF, and KUIN near 
the end of the period, with KSUS, KSTL, and KCPS not being 
impacted until after the end of the current forecast period. 

Elmore

&&

.LSX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MO...None.
IL...None.
&&

$$

WFO LSX
