FXUS63 KEAX 232059
AFDEAX

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Kansas City/Pleasant Hill MO
359 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.Discussion...
Issued at 358 PM CDT SUN OCT 23 2022


Key Messages:

- Strong southerly wind gusts up to 50 mph continue through late
  evening.

- Elevated fire weather danger conditions continue this afternoon.

- Widespread showers (perhaps some rumbles of thunder) expected to
  overspread region by mid to late tomorrow morning and continue
  through the afternoon hours.

- Much cooler (closer to seasonal normals) temperatures expected
  for the work week.


Discussion:

The current synoptic weather pattern is defined by a longwave
troughing across the western CONUS with an associated strong
surface low centered over South Dakota. The tight pressure
gradient out ahead of the approaching surface low has led to very
strong southerly winds this afternoon with gusts up to 45 mph. A
wind advisory remains in effect through 1 AM Monday morning for
wind gusts up to 50 mph before winds finally begin to slacken. A
cluster of showers and storms is moving through the region at the
moment, with the most potent of these located near St. Joseph
where a 50 mph wind gust was measured associated with a
thunderstorm. SPC does highlight much of northeastern KS and 
northwestern MO within a marginal risk for severe storms through
tonight, primarily for wind gusts to 60 mph. Fire weather concerns
also remain elevated due to the cured fuels and gusty southerly
winds even with RH values above 30 percent. By tomorrow morning
the surface low tracks northeast toward the MN/ND/Manitoba tri- 
state/province border and send a long north/south oriented cold
front through into the region. This will team up with a southern
stream shortwave trough coming out of the Texas Panhandle and
will initiate a large shield of moderate showers (and perhaps a
few embedded thunderstorms thanks to about 100 to 200 J/kg of MU
CAPE) that will overspread the region from southwest to northeast
beginning mid to late tomorrow morning and continue through the
afternoon and early evening hours. Additional redevelopment of 
showers will possibly continue into the late evening and early 
overnight hours of Tuesday morning, especially toward central 
Missouri. Most locations across the region are expected to receive
anywhere from 1 to 2 inches of rain (less across far NW 
Missouri), with highest amounts toward Clinton/Sedalia. This will 
provide some much needed rainfall to areas currently experiencing 
severe drought.

Some scattered showers may linger as long as into Tuesday
afternoon, especially for central Missouri, as the closed mid
level low skirts across southern Missouri. Zonal west to east mid
level flow takes hold as the closed low slides to our east for
Wednesday. By Thursday another shortwave trough moves into the
Desert Southwest and turns our mid level flow southwesterly. By
Friday this trough becomes a closed mid level low over east-
central Texas. It is possible that we could see some isolated
showers out from this activity Thursday night into Friday, but
QPF remains below a tenth of an inch at this time. 

As far as temperatures are concerned, after today's heat
temperatures will cool off considerably. High temperatures
tomorrow are expected to be in the upper 60s to low 70s with even
cooler temperatures projected for Tuesday through Friday.


&&

.Aviation...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 1242 PM CDT SUN OCT 23 2022

Gusty southerly winds continue today, with gusts as high as 40+
knots this afternoon through the early overnight period. Winds
should finally relax by around 12z Monday morning. There could be
a few passing showers this afternoon, but otherwise widespread
showers and MVFR conditions will begin overspreading the 
terminals by around 15z Monday morning.


&&

.EAX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
KS...Wind Advisory until 1 AM CDT Monday for KSZ025-057-060-102>105.

MO...Wind Advisory until 1 AM CDT Monday for MOZ001>007-011>016-
     020>024-028>032-037>039-043>045-053-054.

&&

$$

Discussion...BMW
Aviation...BMW
