FXUS63 KLSX 231724
AFDLSX

Area Forecast Discussion...Updated Aviation
National Weather Service Saint Louis MO
1224 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...  (Through Late Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 255 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Southwesterly mid level flow across the region will last for the
next several days as a trough is digging into the Great Basin
today. Within the southwest flow we'll see several shortwave
troughs ripple through our region, with rain chances increasing
with each one. Today's is an extension of a broader wave ejecting
across the central and northern Plains. This will send surface low 
pressure northeast out of the lee of the Rockies into Minnesota, 
with a cold front emerging behind it. The mid level warm/moist 
advection ahead of this may begin to spark a few showers across 
central and northern Missouri this afternoon, although any 
rainfall amounts will be very light considering the lack of 
significant moisture and the very high bases.

At the surface, we'll see a southerly flow continue today with
winds even a bit higher today than yesterday, 20 to 25 mph with
gusts up to 35 mph. While this does not put us into Wind Advisory
territory, it does bring concern for effects on any ongoing
wildfires. While relative humidity will be significantly higher
due to an increasingly moist low level flow from the Gulf of
Mexico, if a fire does get going it would be fanned by these
strong winds and potentially spread quickly given our very dry
vegetation. High temperatures will be a bit cooler today due to
clouds and more low level moisture, but we'll still top out in the
upper 70s to low 80s.

The western trough digs pretty far south into the southern Rockies
aided in part by the absorption of an upper low in the Pacific
west of Baja California. It will also pull in tropical moisture
from Hurricane Roslyn making landfall in western Mexico today,
although this will primarily be in the form of mid and high level
moisture as the low levels get wrung out by the mountains of
Mexico. The next shortwave trough initiates lift along the cold
front on Monday as it moves slowly eastward, stretching roughly
from central Oklahoma into eastern Iowa. Rainfall, as well as a
few thunderstorms, will be focused along and behind the front, so
our area will stay mostly dry on Monday, with the best chance of
rain arriving in the northwest in the evening. It will be another
warm day, though perhaps not quite as warm in the western part of
the area closer to the cold front.

Kimble

.LONG TERM...  (Monday Night through Saturday)
Issued at 255 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The primary trough axis tracks out into the southern plains Monday
night, with surface low pressure developing and tracking along the
frontal boundary. While showers will be ongoing with the
progression of the front through our area Monday night, the best 
lift and moisture surge will be refocusing with the developing low
pressure system. With the arrival of the surface low, the low
level southerly flow will continue to drag in better Gulf of
Mexico moisture ahead of it, lifting it up and over the stalling
frontal boundary. This will lead to our period of heaviest
rainfall along and north of the front. There's still uncertainty
on where this front will be positioned by the time the upper
trough and surface low track along it. The GFS continues to be the
furthest south, with the axis of heaviest rainfall occurring
either in the far southeast part of our area or just outside our
forecast area in southeast Missouri. The ECMWF is a bit further
north with it, with the heaviest rain roughly along I-44 including
into metro St Louis. The CMC is even further northwest, with the
front not even making it into our CWA at that point, tracking the
surface low into Iowa instead. Generally we subscribe to the
consensus idea that the central and southern portion of our
forecast area has the best chance of significant rainfall focused
on Tuesday morning.

With the influx of low level moisture ahead of the surface low,
there's the potential for enough instability for thunderstorms on
Tuesday along and south of the front. This potential is somewhat
limited by weak mid level lapse rates that may be due in part to
the mid level moisture pulled in from Hurricane Roslyn. With the
strong wind fields associated with this trough, even modest
instability could be enough to produce a chance for stronger
thunderstorms. The latest Day3 SPC outlook appropriately keeps 
the severe weather threat just south of our forecast area with the
limitation being the instability factor. But we will need to watch
this time frame as the trend has been for better instability
shifting even further northward ahead of the surface low.

Overall rainfall amounts of 1 to 2 inches are expected Monday
night into Tuesday, although amounts up to 3 inches are possible
especially if we can get enough instability for convection.
Rainfall rates are not expected to be significant enough for a
flooding concern, so we will continue to message this as a
beneficial rainfall, the likes of which we have not seen for
several weeks.

Behind the front and surface low we'll see a return to cooler
conditions as cool surface high pressure builds in Wednesday and
Thursday. Despite rising heights aloft, low level flow remains
easterly even into Friday, so we'll likely stay seasonably cool
into the coming weekend.

The next trough digs into the west on Wednesday and takes a track
a bit further south and east than the previous one. Latest trends
are to slow this wave down with it potentially tracking well south
of our area along the Gulf Coast on Friday, or slowly lumbering
towards us on Saturday. Have reduced POP on Friday due to these
trends as NBM is likely lagging behind the latest guidance which
keeps our area dry.

Kimble

&&

.AVIATION...  (For the 18z TAFs through 18z Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 1215 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR flight conditions are expected to prevail at all local
terminals through the forecast period. Southerly flow is
increasing moisture across the region, leading to an increase in
cloud cover and some spotty showers. Some of these showers have
recently developed in the vicinity of KCOU and KJEF, and are
expected to be short lived. If they do continue on, VCSH may need
to be added to KUIN this afternoon, but confidence currently is
higher in a dry forecast at this terminal. If showers are to 
impact any local terminals, a brief drop to low VFR visibilities 
and possibly high MVFR visibilities is possible. I also can't rule
out a rumble of thunder with this convection, but confidence in 
that is very low at the moment. Winds will weaken slightly 
tonight, but likely not enough to lead to notable, widespread low-
level wind shear developing as the low-level jet continues 
overhead tonight. Therefore, we've removed LLWS from the TAFs, but
will continue to monitor for the potential of LLWS. A front 
approaches the area tomorrow, and moisture pooling along it will 
lead to an increase in cloud cover and a decrease in cloud 
heights. These lower clouds will impact KCOU, KJEF, and KUIN near 
the end of the period, with KSUS, KSTL, and KCPS not being 
impacted until after the end of the current forecast period. 

Elmore

&&

.LSX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MO...None.
IL...None.
&&

$$

WFO LSX
