FXUS66 KSEW 212309
AFDSEW

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Seattle WA
409 PM PDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...A frontal system will move through Western Washington
early this evening. Cool upper level trough moving in behind the
front later tonight with the trough remaining over the area  
Saturday. Weak upper level ridge nosing into the area Saturday 
night and Sunday. Next system coming down the British Columbia 
coast arriving early Monday. Another system will arrive Tuesday 
night. After a brief break a warm front will brush by Wednesday 
night with the trailing cold front moving into the area late 
Thursday into Friday.

&&

.SHORT TERM /TONIGHT THROUGH MONDAY/...Satellite imagery shows 
cloudy skies over Western Washington with the back edge of a cold 
front just to the northwest over the central portion of Vancouver 
Island. Most locations south of Skagit county reporting rain at 3 
pm/22z. Temperatures are on the chilly side, upper 40s to mid 50s.

Cold front moving through the area this evening with the steady 
rain coming to an end. Cool upper level trough behind the front 
settling over the area later tonight and remaining over Western 
Washington Saturday. Snow levels, currently near 4000 feet in the 
North Cascades and 5000 feet in the South Cascades will drop 
another 500-1000 feet overnight into Saturday. Showers overnight 
into Saturday morning will begin decreasing Saturday afternoon. 
Snow amounts generally in the 2 to 4 inch range with higher 
locations like Paradise ending up with up to 8 inches of new snow 
by late Saturday afternoon. Cloud cover overnight will keep low 
temperatures from falling too much with lows in the upper 30s to 
mid 40s. Highs Saturday in the 50s. 

Upper level ridge nosing into the area Saturday night with shower
activity ending and skies clearing. Cool air mass still overhead.
This combined with the clearing skies will make for the coldest 
night in months with outlining areas having a chance of dropping 
to near freezing with mid 30s to lower 40s elsewhere.

Upper level ridge remaining over Western Washington Sunday for a
dry but cool day with highs in the 50s. 

Upper level ridge weakening Sunday evening as the next front moves
down the British Columbia coastline. Rain out ahead of the front
spreading over the area overnight Sunday night into early Monday
morning. This system will be wetter than today's front. Snow
levels will remain around 4000 feet in the North Cascades. Mount 
Baker looking at 4 to 8 inches of new snow before the front moves 
through Monday morning. Snow levels higher, near 6000 feet around
Mount Rainier. Upper level trough behind the front Monday 
afternoon into Monday evening with showers decreasing. Lows mostly
in the lower to mid 40s. Highs in the mid 50s. 

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...Fall weather continuing with
systems arriving Tuesday night, Wednesday night and again 
Thursday night into Friday. Snow levels remaining in the 
3500-4500 foot range until a push of warmer air ahead of the front
Thursday night lifts snow levels to 5000-6000 feet. System
Wednesday night just a glancing blow from a warm front with just a
chance of showers. Rain with the systems Tuesday night and again
Thursday night into Friday. Felton

&&

.AVIATION...Northwesterly flow aloft in place over W WA, expected to 
relax starting this evening as an upper level trough digs into the 
area. Surface winds generally from the SW, although there is some 
variance due to topographic or water effects.

Cigs a mixed bag as the front moves through the area. Locations 
along the Strait and points north seeing generally VFR conditions 
while most points south showing MVFR to IFR conditions, with the 
exception of the south Sound where a small enclave of VFR conditions 
exist. As the night continues and moisture becomes more widespread, 
will likely see most, if not all, sites dip down into at least MVFR 
conditions. Visibility restrictions have been limited so far today, 
but cannot be ruled out tonight and into early Saturday morning.

KSEA...MVFR cigs likely to remain in place for most of the period. 
Rain may allow for temporary reductions in visibility, but nothing 
like the smoke from previous days. Winds S/SW 7-8kts, turning to the 
NW late this evening and becoming light and variable tonight.  18

&&

.MARINE...An active weather pattern is expected over W WA through 
the forecast period. High-end SCA level winds are expected this 
evening and tonight while remaining area waters will see much lower 
winds. NW swell 7-9ft this evening will build to 10-12ft overnight 
tonight and then peak around 15 ft on Saturday. Hazardous seas will 
also impact the coastal waters through Saturday. As such, have 
issued an SCA for rough bar for Grays Harbor with the mid-morning 
update. The inherited SCA will cover the hazardous seas for the 
coastal waters.

The area will then reside in between systems on Sunday with light 
winds over the waters with swells initially around 10ft subsiding to 
6-8ft thru the day. Then Sunday night and Monday another, 
potentially stronger, system will move across the area bringing high-
end SCA level winds to most waters, with the potential for gales 
over the coastal waters and some of the northern interior waters. 
Swells will also build back above 10ft, making for hazardous seas. 

Additional systems are likely to follow the previous storms, with 
another period of elevated winds and seas on Tuesday and another 
during the latter half of the week.  18

&&

.HYDROLOGY...No river flooding is expected for the next 7 days.
However, with the potential for heavy rain with each of the next
few frontal systems over the next week, there is some concern for
potential burn scar debris flows in the recently burned areas.

&&

.SEW WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
WA...None.
PZ...Small Craft Advisory from 11 PM this evening to 5 AM PDT Sunday 
     for Coastal Waters From Cape Flattery To James Island 10 To 
     60 Nm-Coastal Waters From Cape Flattery To James Island Out 
     10 Nm-Coastal Waters From James Island To Point Grenville 
     10 To 60 Nm-Coastal Waters From James Island To Point 
     Grenville Out 10 Nm-Coastal Waters From Point Grenville To 
     Cape Shoalwater 10 To 60 Nm-Coastal Waters From Point 
     Grenville To Cape Shoalwater Out 10 Nm-Grays Harbor Bar.

&&

$$
