FXUS63 KLSX 212324
AFDLSX

Area Forecast Discussion...Updated Aviation
National Weather Service Saint Louis MO
624 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SHORT TERM...  (Through Late Saturday Night)
Issued at 236 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

The focus for this portion of the period is fire weather conditions 
today and abnormal warmth this weekend. See the end of the 
discussion for more on fire weather conditions. 

Per current water vapor imagery, upper-level flow is becoming 
increasingly zonal to southwesterly as the trough that has been 
plaguing the eastern CONUS shifts eastward. At the surface, gusty 
low-level winds continue to advect warmer air into the CWA, with 
temperatures currently tracking 5-10 degrees above what they were 
yesterday at this time. With about another hour of heating left, 
temperatures are expected to climb another degree or two, topping 
out roughly 10-15 degrees above climatological normals area-wide. 

Tomorrow, a trough will begin digging across the Intermountain West 
with flow through the atmosphere over the CWA becoming increasingly 
southerly to southwesterly. This will aid in ramping up mid-level 
warm air advection, with 850 mb temperatures expected to top out 
around 16 degrees C per ensemble means, which is above the 97th 
percentile of climatology. These 850 mb temperatures and strong 
southerly surface flow correlates will with temperatures topping out 
in the upper 70s to low 80s, with portions of central and 
northeastern Missouri seeing highs in the mid 80s.

Elmore

.LONG TERM...  (Sunday through Next Friday)
Issued at 236 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Our main focus for this portion of the period is on the chance for 
rain early next week. 

For Sunday, the trough centered over the Intermountain West will 
continue to deepen as southwesterly flow aloft remains in place over 
the Middle Mississippi Valley. A subtle shortwave within this flow 
will pass over the region early Sunday coincident with the left exit 
region of the upper-level jet. Additionally, the nose of the low-
level jet will be edging into the CWA, combining to create lift 
through the depth of much of the atmosphere. However, consensus 
among model soundings is that the atmosphere will still be too much 
on the dry side for rainfall, though some of the global 
deterministic models produce some light, spurious rainfall Sunday 
morning. While I can't rule that out, my confidence is higher in 
conditions remaining dry, which is reflected in the current 
forecast.  

Guidance consensus is that the low-level jet will weaken somewhat 
during the day on Sunday, though it will still be strong enough to 
provide forcing that may utilize the warm, moist air streaming into 
the region to produce brief showers for some locations. However, 
confidence is high that most of the day will be dry across the area. 
Given increasing cloud cover due to moisture return and 850 mb 
temperatures cooling by a degree or two, surface temperatures will 
cool by a couple of degrees on Sunday for some locations compared to 
Saturday. 

Over the last 24 hours, ensemble guidance has converged on a slower 
solution for the evolution of the western trough for the late-
weekend and early-week period. With this solution, southerly to 
southwesterly flow will remain in place over the CWA longer, 
allowing for more moisture to advect into the region ahead of our 
next system. Generally, a leading shortwave within the trough will 
push a surface low across the Northern Plains and Upper Midwest with 
an attendant cold front sweeping across the Plains and approaching 
Missouri on Monday. Given the slowness of the trough and lack of 
more robust forcing to advance the front, it will likely slow just 
to the west of the area during the day on Monday, leading to another 
day of above-normal temperatures. The front will creep closer to 
portions of central Missouri Monday night, with rain chances ramping 
up over that portion of the region. 

A second shortwave within the trough will eject out into the 
Southern Plains and track toward the Middle Mississippi Valley on 
Tuesday. In turn, a low will form along the slowed cold front and 
move northeastward into the region, bringing the chance of 
widespread rainfall to the area. Despite ensembles converging on 
this general solution, there is still enough spread in the upper-
level pattern to create uncertainty regarding the timing of the 
front, surface low, and associated rainfall. Despite this 
uncertainty, confidence is high that the area will see some much 
needed rainfall early next week, with guidance increasing rainfall
amounts each initialization. Currently generally 1-2" is expected
area-wide, with slightly lower amounts eastward into south- 
central Illinois and slightly higher amounts westward into central
Missouri.

In the wake of the front and Tuesday's system, narrow ensemble 
spread builds confidence that temperatures will likely return to 
around climatological normals through the end of the week. 

Elmore

&&

.AVIATION...  (For the 00z TAFs through 00z Saturday Evening)
Issued at 624 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Dry and VFR flight conditions will continue through the TAF period 
beneath periodic upper-level clouds. A 40 to 45 kt southwesterly low-
level jet is forecast to develop and overlay central MO through west-
central IL by late this evening. Despite southerly to south-
southeasterly surface winds largely remaining above 5 kt at all 
terminals, enough directional wind shear below the southwesterly low-
level jet supports concern for marginal LLWS up to 1600 ft at KUIN, 
KCOU, and KJEF. LLWS should end mid-Saturday morning as southerly 
surface winds area-wide strengthen and begin to occasionally gust 
around 25 kt. These winds are anticipated to gradually slacken 
Saturday evening.

Pfahler

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...  
Issued at 236 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Many observation sites are currently reporting relative 
humidity values 25-15 percent across the region. Fine fuel moisture 
is likely around 5-6 percent given trends over the last several 
days. The only limiting factor for Red Flag conditions is sustained 
winds being a few mph lower than criteria, though there have been a 
few observations sites that have reached criteria this afternoon. 
Regardless, these conditions fall in the range of Heightened Fire 
Danger and will lead to erratic fire behavior. Winds will decrease 
around sunset this evening and being to turn to out of the south, 
and relative humidity will increase as temperatures decrease. Winds 
will remain out of the south tomorrow and be a little stronger than 
what is being experienced today. However, these southerly winds will 
be ushering moisture into the area, leading to relative humidity 
values dropping out in the 30-35 percent and mitigating erratic fire 
behavior. 

Elmore


&&

.LSX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MO...None.
IL...None.
&&

$$

WFO LSX
