FXUS62 KJAX 220050
AFDJAX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Jacksonville FL
850 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...New UPDATE...

.UPDATE...
Issued at 845 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Sfc high pressure at 1020 mb is over the inland areas from the FL panhandle
into central GA. The light to calm winds over much of the inland zones,
along with the clear skies/ dry air, will enable good radiational
cooling. So based on latest obs and guidance have decrease min temps
by 1-2 deg for portions of the area. Min temps may slip into the 
upper 30s in isolated, inland areas of southeast GA. Otherwise, 
no major changes in the forecast at this time.

.MARINE...

Northerly winds look to increase slightly tonight as a pinched gradient
develops between the inland high pressure and the troughiness offshore.
Averaging coastal winds gets close to 15 kt for portions of the waters
so tweaked up the winds in the evening CWF and boosted seas slightly
as the winds begin to increase. Some shower activity is well offshore,
some 90 miles or so east of Marineland. This activity will pick up
a bit by early Saturday morning into our southeast marine zones. 

&&

.NEAR TERM...
(through Tonight)
Issued at 232 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

The region will be between a ridge of high pressure to the west
northwest, and an inverted trough to the southeast through Tonight. 
Most of the moisture associated with this trough will remain to the
southeast Tonight, so dry forecast remains in place, but a few 
clouds will move into NE FL coastal counties. 

Temperatures will be milder Tonight, especially along the NE FL 
coast due to the flow over the relatively warmer waters.

&&

.SHORT TERM...
(Saturday through Tuesday) 
Issued at 232 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

The region will remain between a high pressure ridge to the west, 
and a trough to the east over the weekend. The enhanced pressure 
gradient between these features will yield a gusty onshore flow at 
area beaches. There is a chance that a low tries to form to the east
over the weekend in this trough, which would further enhance this
gradient for winds. At this time continuing to keep the forecast for
the weekend dry, but the precipitation shield associated with the 
trough will get very close to St Johns and Flagler Tonight through
Saturday night. So the potential for a brief coastal shower along 
NE FL coast still can not be completely ruled out. So inland is a 
dry forecast with mainly clear skies through the weekend, whereas 
passing clouds will be in the forecast closer to the coast. 
Temperatures will continue to be below normal through the weekend.

Early next week the trough to the east begins to flatten as the 
ridge lifts more to the north. Once again the coast will be on 
the fringe of rain chances from the trough, but at this time 
guidance keeps it offshore. With the weakening ridge though a 
gradual increase in clouds is expected. Temperatures will continue
to moderate early next week, with a trend toward above normal 
readings for Sunday.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Tuesday night through next Friday) 
Issued at 232 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A cold front is forecast to move east southeast across the area this
period. The models have been a bit inconsistent in timing and 
moisture content of this feature, leading to a degree of uncertainty
in this periods forecast. Current forecast timing brings the front 
into inland counties late in the day Wednesday, then across forecast
area in the Wednesday night to Thursday timeframe. There is limited
moisture associated with this front, but enough to warrant mention 
of precipitation chances during the window of its expected passage. 

The remnants of the front are expected to develop into an 
inverted trough off the coast on Friday, as high pressure builds 
from the northwest. With this pattern most of the area should be 
dry, but coastal areas could have a few showers. 

Temperatures this period will trend above normal.

&&

.AVIATION...
(00Z TAFS)
Issued at 732 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR through Saturday. Still some indications that a few low clouds
could impact SGJ, CRG, and possibly JAX on Saturday, and based on
soundings and latest guidance few to scattered coverage at or 
above 4 kft or so looks good for now. Guidance shows shows the 
highest MVFR ceiling chance at about 15-25 percent at SGJ, with 
increasing chances Saturday night. Sfc winds will be light northerly
through early Saturday morning, and then increase again after 14Z
to around 8-14 kt. Gustier winds expected for SGJ, SSI, and CRG.

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 232 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

The region will be between a high pressure ridge to the north 
northwest, and an inverted trough just east of area waters through
Tonight. This high pressure ridge will move a little further to the 
west Saturday into Sunday, as the core of the inverted trough moves 
just east of waters. Enhanced winds and seas are forecast due to the
gradient between the high and this trough. There is a potential that
this trough could develop a low center in it, which would further 
elevate conditions. The trough to the east is expected to flatten
somewhat early next week as the ridge to the west lifts more to the
north. A cold front is expected to move east southeast across the 
area around the middle of next week.   

Rip Currents: SE GA  Moderate through Saturday
              NE FL  Moderate through Saturday  

              The risk is trending toward high for Sunday.

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
AMG  40  76  50  80 /   0   0   0   0 
SSI  53  74  60  76 /   0   0   0   0 
JAX  47  76  56  78 /   0   0   0   0 
SGJ  56  75  63  77 /   0  10  10  10 
GNV  46  77  55  81 /   0   0   0   0 
OCF  47  79  57  82 /   0   0   0   0 

&&

.JAX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
FL...None.
GA...None.
&&

$$
