FXUS63 KEAX 212333
AFDEAX

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Kansas City/Pleasant Hill MO
633 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.Discussion...
Issued at 321 PM CDT FRI OCT 21 2022

Key messages:

- Gusty winds Saturday and Sunday will cause high fire danger.

- Wind gusts on Sunday may reach up to 45 mph.

- Strong storms possible Sunday night into Monday.

Discussion:

 Breezy, dry and well above normal temperatures have lead to a high 
fire danger today. The increase in temperatures today is occurring 
due to quasi-zonal flow aloft as well as strong warm air advection 
as the area is wedged between a weak cold front approaching the area 
and a weak surface ridge over the Ozarks. this has allow 
temperatures to rise into the low to mid 80s. tonight winds will 
decouple enough to lose the gusts but modest WAA will still prevail 
keep lows in the 50s to near 60. Very strong WAA will continue 
tomorrow with southerly wind gusts reaching 25-35 mph. This strong 
southerly fetch is expected to usher in higher dewpoints in the 
low to mid 50s which may be enough to keep fire danger from critical 
levels but regardless high fire danger is still expected. The 
slightly more moist airmass will keep highs near todays highs in the 
low to mid 80s. Saturday night into Sunday a upper level trough will 
dig from the Pacific NW into the central Rockies. This will allow 
lee frontogenesis to develop across the western High Plains. This 
will further tighten the pressure gradient across the area on Sunday 
and winds will gust out of the south up to 45 mph. This will also 
aid in keeping temperatures well above normal with highs in the low 
to mid 80s. Sunday night the upper trough will extend from the 
northern Plains into the Desert SW. This will force the cold front 
towards the forecast area. A few thunderstorms will be possible 
overnight Sunday night into Monday morning however convergence along 
the front will be weak. Monday, the upper level trough will develop 
a upper low in the base of the trough over the Four Corner while the 
northern stream of the trough weakens. This will allow the cold 
front to sag into the area Monday. During the day Monday through 
Tuesday, several lead shortwave ejecting out ahead of the upper 
level low as it moves from the Four Corners into the southern Plains 
will bring a few rounds of showers and thunderstorms enhanced by a 
low level jet. Tuesday night into Wednesday, the upper level trough 
will move from the southern Plains along the I-44 corridor into the 
low Ohio River Valley continuing shower chances. Conditions finally 
dry out on Wednesday night as the system pushes well east and 
surface high pressure builds into the area. Highs on Tuesday and 
Wednesday will be in the 50s to near 60 rising into the upper 50s to 
mid 60s.

&&

.Aviation...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday Evening)
Issued at 633 PM CDT FRI OCT 21 2022

VFR conds will prevail thru the pd with just oncl sct high 
clouds. Main concern for aviators will be the gusty winds incrg 
aft 15Z to 15-20kts with gusts to 25-30kts.

&&

.EAX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
KS...NONE.
MO...NONE.
&&

$$

Discussion...73
Aviation...73
