FXUS61 KBOX 212257
AFDBOX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Boston/Norton MA
657 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Warming trend continues Saturday with highs reaching 70 in some
areas. A wet period is expected Sunday into Monday, especially 
near the coast where locally heavy rain is possible at times. 
Warming trend Tuesday into Thursday with above normal 
temperatures but still unsettled with the risk of showers at 
times.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM SATURDAY MORNING/...
655 pm update...

High pres in control will bring clear and light winds with 
another efficient radiational cooling night tonight. However, 
since we have a milder air mass in place, temperatures should 
not get quite as low as they did Friday morning. Lows across the
interior will fall into the low/mid 30s with a few upper 20s 
possible CT valley in northern MA. Closer to the coast however, 
lows will be in the low to mid 40s. The outer Cape/Islands and 
urban center of Boston will have the mildest temperatures 
bottoming out in the upper 40s. Patchy late night radiation fog 
is possible in the normally prone locations. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM SATURDAY MORNING THROUGH SATURDAY NIGHT/...
Tomorrow

High pressure remains in control tomorrow. Warm air advection allows 
temps at 925 to rise near 10C. As diurnal mixing ensues during the 
afternoon, this will support surface temperatures in the upper 60s 
to perhaps low 70s in some areas. Winds will be light out of the 
south/south west with clear skies. Pick of the weekend!

Tomorrow Night

Should be a mostly quiet night tomorrow night. Persistent southwest 
flow will keep temperatures a bit more mild that we saw during the 
middle of this week. Most areas will stay in the 40s with the 
Cape/Islands likely staying in the upper 40s to low 50s. We will see 
increasing cloudiness out of the south ahead of an inverted-
trough/low-pressure wave that will be approaching from the south. As 
this occurs winds will shift from southwest to northeast ahead 
of the advancing low. This system is likely to produce periods 
of heavy rainfall on Sunday (see long-term discussion), but may 
arrive too late to produce any rainfall during the tomorrow 
night period. Should this system speed up a bit, there would be 
a chance for The Cape/Islands to see some lighter showers prior 
to sunrise before the more widespread/persistent rainfall 
approaches on Sunday.

&&

.LONG TERM /SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Highlights...

* Periods of rain developing Sunday into Monday, especially near the 
  coast. Locally heavy rainfall possible

* Warming trend Tue-Thu with above normal temps but risk of showers 
  will continue

Sunday...

Low pres along the SE US coast on Sunday with well defined surface 
front/inverted trough extending northward to east of New Eng. Deeper 
moisture and higher PWATs to the south begin to lift north into SNE 
during Sunday but plenty of dry air to start the day further in the 
interior. We expect rain to overspread eastern New Eng through early 
afternoon as isentropic lift increases on cool side of boundary and 
is enhanced by a modest easterly low level jet. However, less 
certain that rain makes it further in the interior as it will be 
fighting the dry air and surface ridging. Much of the day in western 
New Eng will likely be dry with just chance of showers developing 
later in the afternoon. The rain will be focused across eastern New 
Eng. Highs upper 50s to lower 60s, but temps may fall into/through 
the 50s after rain develops. Somewhat gusty NE winds develop near 
the south coast in the afternoon. 

Sunday night into Monday...

Quasi-stationary surface boundary persists near or just east of Cape 
Cod through the period. This should focus the steadier and heavier 
rain across eastern New Eng. However, deep moisture moves further 
inland across rest of SNE so expect occasional rain across all SNE 
Sun night into Mon. The uncertainty will be the western extent of 
rainfall on Monday as moisture gradient will be nearby which could 
limit rainfall in western New Eng. In addition, some elevated 
instability begins to move in from the ocean Sun night into Mon so 
can't rule out a t-storm or 2, especially in eastern New Eng. Much 
of the rain should begin to taper off by Mon night. Global ensemble 
guidance indicates axis of heaviest rainfall will set east of I-95 
corridor where 1-2 inches possible. Amounts may be much less further 
in the interior. 

Tuesday through Friday...

Sub-tropical ridge builds east of New Eng with warming temps aloft 
which will lead to a warming trend and temps several degrees above 
normal through Wed/Thu. The ridge may temporarily break down around 
midweek but overall pattern favors ridging and above normal heights 
through the end of the week. Temps should at least reach well into 
the 60s, with some lower 70s possible Tue/Wed as GEFS/EPS ensembles 
show a decent signal for 70+ degree temps. Nighttime lows will also 
be rather mild for this time of year with lows in the 50s. However, 
the pattern look somewhat unsettled during this period as a weakness 
in the upper level pattern may linger across the NE Tue, with 
additional shortwave energy lifting north along the western 
periphery of the upper ridge around midweek. Result will be more 
clouds and risk of showers at times but a washout is not expected. 
Will also have to watch potential low pressure around Bermuda 
midweek which could gain tropical or sub-tropical characteristics.

&&

.AVIATION /00Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
Forecaster Confidence Levels:

Low - less than 30 percent. 
Medium - 30 to 60 percent. 
High - greater than 60 percent.

00Z TAF update...High Confidence

Tonight and Saturday

VFR, with patchy late night fog possible in the normally prone 
locations. Light south/southwest winds becoming calm overnight. 
5 to 10 knot south/southwest winds kick back in Sat.

Saturday Night

VFR for the most of southern New England tomorrow night. May see
some IFR/MVFR ceilings move over The Cape/Islands ahead of a
low pressure system approaching from the south after 06Z Sunday.
Southwest winds becoming east/northeast as the low-pressure
system approaches.

KBOS Terminal...High confidence. VFR through the period. Low
prob of a sea breeze Sat afternoon but confidence not high
enough to include in the TAF. Will evaluate further with 00z
hi-res guidance. 

KBDL Terminal...High confidence. 

Outlook /Sunday through Wednesday/... 

Sunday: MVFR/IFR conditions possible. Breezy. Chance RA.

Sunday Night: Mainly MVFR, with areas IFR possible. Breezy. RA
likely, SHRA likely.

Monday: Mainly MVFR, with areas IFR possible. Breezy. Chance
SHRA.

Monday Night: Mainly VFR, with areas MVFR possible. Chance
SHRA.

Tuesday: Mainly VFR, with local MVFR possible. Slight chance
SHRA.

Tuesday Night: Mainly VFR, with areas MVFR possible. Slight
chance SHRA.

Wednesday: Mainly MVFR, with areas VFR possible. Chance SHRA.

&&

.MARINE...
Forecaster Confidence Levels:

Low - less than 30 percent. 
Medium - 30 to 60 percent. 
High - greater than 60 percent.

Tonight through Tomorrow Night

High pressure keeps the coastal waters fairly calm for October. 
Light south/southwest winds from 5 to 15 knots. Seas max out in the 
2 to 4 foot range across the outer marine zones. Tomorrow night an 
area of low-pressure advancing from the south will result in a wind 
shift to the east/northeast. May see some showers arrive ahead of 
this system prior to sunrise Sunday.

Outlook /Sunday through Wednesday/...

Sunday: Low risk for Small Craft Advisory winds with gusts up
to 25 kt. Areas of seas approaching 5 ft. Rain. 

Sunday Night: Low risk for Small Craft Advisory winds with
gusts up to 25 kt. Seas up to 5 ft. Rain likely, rain showers
likely. 

Monday: Winds less than 25 kt. Seas up to 5 ft. Rain showers
likely. 

Monday Night: Winds less than 25 kt. Areas of seas approaching
5 ft. Slight chance of rain showers. 

Tuesday: Winds less than 25 kt. Seas locally approaching 5 ft. 

Tuesday Night: Winds less than 25 kt. Seas locally approaching
5 ft. Slight chance of rain showers. 

Wednesday: Winds less than 25 kt. Areas of seas approaching
5 ft. Chance of rain showers.

&&

.BOX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CT...None.
MA...None.
RI...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...KJC/RM
NEAR TERM...KJC/RM
SHORT TERM...RM
LONG TERM...KJC
AVIATION...KJC/RM
MARINE...KJC/RM
