FXUS63 KABR 220130 AAB
AFDABR

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Aberdeen SD
830 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 821 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

No changes planned to sensible weather forecast elements tonight.
The light returns ongoing across the northern half of North Dakota
will stay away from this CWA. The surface low over western South
Dakota will reposition to central South Dakota by 12Z Saturday.
Should be seeing winds over north central South Dakota responding
by switching around to the north-northwest.

UPDATE Issued at 642 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

See below for an aviation forecast discussion for the 00Z TAFs.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(This Evening through Saturday Night)
Issued at 328 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

The main forecast challenges in the near term are temperatures, as 
well as the potential for elevated fire danger Saturday afternoon. 
Upper level zonal flow currently over the area will become 
southwesterly tonight as a trough slides over the Pacific NW. The 
trough will dig further down the far western part of the country, 
keeping southwesterly flow over the Northern Plains through Saturday 
night. 

At the surface, weak high pressure currently over the area will get 
pushed east this evening as the leading edge of a low pressure 
system moves in from the west. This low, and an associated 
stationary front, will be elongated from west to east across the 
state tonight and Saturday, Temperatures on Saturday will be a bit 
tricky, with fairly warm air south of the boundary and somewhat 
cooler air to the north. May see some elevated fire danger Saturday 
afternoon south of the boundary as relative humidity values fall to 
around 20 percent. At this time, winds do not look to be too strong, 
which will likely keep conditions from reaching headline criteria. 
The main low to the west winds up over western South Dakota/western 
Nebraska Saturday night, with the front extending from it to 
northwestern Minnesota, with cooler air to the west and warmer air 
to the east of the front. With fairly dry air in place, no 
precipitation is expected through the short term period.  

Low temperatures tonight will be in the 40s. High temperatures on 
Saturday will range from the mid to upper 60s across north central 
South Dakota, to around 80 degrees along and south of Interstate 90. 
Lows Saturday night will range from the lower 40s across north 
central South Dakota, to around 50 degrees across far northeastern 
South Dakota and west central Minnesota.

.LONG TERM...(Sunday through Friday)
Issued at 328 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

The main challenge in this period will surround a storm system that 
will move through the region by late in the weekend into early next 
week. Starting off Sunday morning, our forecast area will still 
remain out ahead of this system. A significant upper trough will be 
working across the western CONUS with a sfc low organizing and 
strengthening across the lee of the Rockies of WY/CO. A tight 
pressure gradient ahead of this feature is anticipated across 
eastern SD into western MN by afternoon. South to southeast winds 
will kick in and turn gusty during the day. Did continue the trend 
of beefing up wind speeds on Sunday given the consistent signal in 
the gradient tightening as the sfc low deepens. This will help to 
draw in much warmer air across our eastern CWA. A good warm air 
advection pattern will set up as most model consensus remains landed 
on 850mb temps of about +17 to +20C across our eastern CWA. Ensemble 
probs of seeing 80 degrees still ping some of our southeast zones 
with low end chances. Bumped up Sunday's highs with a mix of 
NBM/NBM75 to account for the possibilities of these warmer readings. 
The only hold back to this coming to fruition perhaps could be 
amount of cloud cover in the area during peak heating.

Going into Sunday night and early Monday, model trends still remain 
pointed at a sfc low tracking out of western/central NE into eastern 
SD. Guidance hasn't change a great deal from previous fcst package 
pcpn evolution with this storm system. It looks like our eastern 
zones will remain on the drier side of things while our western 
zones will see a better opportunity for pcpn. As the sfc low tracks 
across eastern SD Sunday night, a sharp cold front will barrel 
eastward across our forecast area. Some of our eastern zones could 
see a few thunderstorms ahead of this front, while mostly light rain 
is anticipated for the James Valley and points west. Much cooler air 
will begin to filter in on increasing northwest winds as the low 
lifts out toward the northeast. Temperatures falling to freezing or 
below toward early Monday morning out west will allow rain to become 
mixed with some snow across our western zones, mainly across north-
central sections of SD. It still appears this system will deliver a 
rain/snow to snow scenario for our western CWA. Probabilities still 
remain low for a freezing precip setup developing based off latest 
sounding data and ensemble probs. Any snow accums would be confined 
to north-central SD and west river zones and and looking pretty 
minimal at best at this time. The one certain aspect of this system 
will be the ramping up of northwesterly winds as this system pulls 
away on Monday. A tightening gradient will lead to winds pushing 
close to advisory levels across our western zones by Monday 
afternoon.

The remainder of the term looks to turn more quiet with dry 
conditions overtaking the area once again until perhaps late in the 
period. The air mass coming into place behind the early week storm 
system will feature more typical late October type temperatures with 
overnight lows in the 20s to around 30 and highs in the 40s and 
50s.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday Evening)
Issued at 642 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Terminals KABR,KATY,KPIR,KMBG

VFR conditions will prevail across the area through the TAF
period. While a low level jet of up to 30 to 35 knots develops and
moves from central to northeast South Dakota overnight, there
could be a moving window of low level wind shear for a few hours,
starting out first at KPIR around ~ 03Z and then spreading over
toward KABR and KATY generally between ~ 06z-12Z Saturday.

&&

.ABR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SD...None.
MN...None.
&&

$$

UPDATE...Dorn
SHORT TERM...Parkin
LONG TERM...Vipond
AVIATION...Dorn
