FXUS63 KFSD 212321
AFDFSD

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Sioux Falls SD
621 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This Evening through Saturday)
Issued at 248 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

KEY MESSAGES

1) Very warm and increasingly windy this weekend with increasing 
fire weather concerns

2) Low end very conditional severe weather risk later Sunday east of 
I-29

3) Meaningful rain chances remain low with cooler temperatures 
returning next week

Tonight: Surface high drifting to the east will help turn winds back 
out of southerly direction, although remaining light. Otherwise, 
overnight lows in the upper 30s and 40s are expected. 

Saturday: A very mild day expected as 850 mb temperatures AOA the 
90th percentile of climatology overspread the region for the 
weekend. Given the ongoing drought and our tendency to overmix 
progged guidance, have favored the warmer side of guidance with 
widespread upper 70s and 80s. This puts some afternoon highs within 
striking range of record territory at some locations. On a similar 
note, while not overly strong, suspect we will see afternoon wind 
gusts work into at least the 20-30 mph range, perhaps higher if 
greater mixing is realized. Fire weather concerns are discussed 
further below. 

.LONG TERM...(Saturday Night through Friday)
Issued at 248 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Sunday: Upper level trough becomes of greater influence for Sunday, 
further tightening the SPG with elongated lee cyclogenesis over the 
Nebraska Panhandle. This will again result in a very mild day with a 
stiff south to southeasterly wind and gusts likely nearing or 
exceeding 30 mph, especially near/east of I-29. NAM based guidance 
still keying in on low level stratus for at least the first half of 
the day although is at odds with other guidance. Further aloft, 
upper level trough will pivot northeast as northern and southern 
stream jet maxes try to marry. This will help drive an eastward 
advancing cold front/dryline into the region late in the day. Ahead 
of this, a narrow ribbon of instability around 500 J/kg will advect 
northward. Most soundings would suggest any usable instability would 
be elevated but not inconceivable to achieve a surface parcel if 
locally warmer than progged. Last couple model suites have slowed 
down the strongest 850 mb winds pivoting into the area until around 
or after 00z however, about 6 hours later than they showed a couple 
days ago. This may ultimately set up the better forcing/convergence 
just east/southeast of our FA. Nonetheless, given strong dynamics 
along/ahead of the front, can't rule out some convection east of I-
29 from very late afternoon thru the evening hours. Should 
convection form, the strong flow aloft would suggest a primary risk 
of damaging winds and secondary risk of marginally severe hail with 
cool temperatures aloft. This low potential scenario is highlighted 
by a Day 3 Marginal Risk from SPC. 

Sunday Night: As mentioned above, strongest 850 mb winds may not 
arrive until the evening and overnight hours. Forecast soundings 
suggest at least some of this higher momentum (40+ kt) air should 
work to the surface and thus will likely see a gusty end to Sunday 
and start to Monday, especially east of I-29. This also would likely 
be the period most favored for precipitation (20-50%) with the ECMWF 
and its ensemble members most bullish on this potential. In either 
case, any precipitation amounts likely remain quite underwhelming. 

Monday: Residual CAA keeps winds breezy into Monday out of the 
west/northwest with mixed layer winds suggesting gusts to at least 
30mph, especially early on and north of I-90. Precipitation chances 
likely focus across our far east counties or even further east of 
there with somewhat of a non-diurnal curve to cooler temperatures. 

Tuesday thru Thursday: Region remains in a southwest flow regime 
aloft with a couple more coherent vort lobes mid week, one north and 
one south of our immediate area. In terms of sensible weather, 
precipitation chances look to remain low with near/below normal 
temperatures and occasional breezy periods. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday Evening)
Issued at 619 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR conditions are likely into Saturday morning. A few isolated
spots are picking up minor visibility restrictions due to harvest
activities along with wildfire smoke. However, feel risks are too
low to include at the TAF locations. 

Winds will turn southerly into Saturday morning, with upper clouds
drifting through the area. Some very minor low-lvl wind shear
could be anticipated after midnight, but too low to indicate in
current TAF. 

VFR conditions are likely through Saturday, with gusts over 20
knots in the afternoon. 

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 248 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Fire weather concerns will increase this weekend, 
especially with ongoing drought conditions and cured crops. Well 
above normal temperatures and a dry air mass will drive afternoon 
relative humidities into critical values in most areas, in fact 
widespread teens seem feasible. Question will be winds, raw model 
guidance would suggest southerly winds stay just shy of criteria or 
mid to upper teens for sustained speeds and gusts in the low to 
perhaps mid 20s. With this said, recent verification trends have 
shown a consistent trend to overmix and achieve higher winds than 
progged. Looking at model forecast soundings, most show only a small 
inversion preventing mixing to mid 20 kts momentum thus leaving the 
door open for 30+ mph gusts. This will need to monitored closely for 
the need for future headlines. 

Sunday will bring higher dewpoints advected in the southerly flow 
but at the same time an increase in wind speeds/gusts. Despite 
likely falling short on RH criteria, very dry fuels and winds likely 
near or above criteria will still present a very real fire danger. 
Question will be how fast highest momentum 850 mb flow (resulting in 
35+ mph gusts) rotates in with latest trends pointing toward more of 
an evening time frame. If this were to occur in the afternoon, as is 
more indicative of the ECMWF, then headlines may need to be 
considered east of I-29 despite the higher RH values.

&&

.FSD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SD...None.
MN...None.
IA...None.
NE...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...Kalin
LONG TERM...Kalin
AVIATION...Dux
FIRE WEATHER...Kalin
