FXUS63 KUNR 232033
AFDUNR

Area Forecast Discussion For Western SD and Northeastern WY
National Weather Service Rapid City SD
233 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.DISCUSSION...(This Evening Through Sunday)
Issued at 233 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Vigorous longwave trough and associated low pressure system 
slowly moving east and deepening this afternoon. Cold front has 
cleared most of the FA with gusty NW winds ongoing across the 
region. Primary frontal precip band shifting slowly east this 
afternoon. Strong CAA had supported a quick change over to snow 
over Campbell county earlier today, with snow having ended there. 
Frontal band will shift east this evening and support some rain 
and higher elevation snow with bouts of snow over NE WY as a 
series of upglide pulses skirt the region there. A quick 1-2 
inches will be possible in the WY/northern BH this evening. 
However, the best chances for snow will be later tonight into 
Monday morning as the TROWAL and main deformation band backs into 
NE WY and the NW BH. Latest QPF guidance suggest a bit more snow 
now into the central BH, mainly from Deerfield west and so have 
decided to add that zone to the adv, esp given progged winds. 
Otherwise, all other winter weather adv remain. There remains some
lingering uncertainty regarding snow amounts in the winter wx adv
areas and locations near the adv (NE of the BH) with potentially 
more snow possible on the NW SD plains, and will monitor for 
potential headline upgrades/expansions, esp given forecast winds. 
The other main impact from this system will be strong NW winds. 
Expecting solid wind adv numbers on the SD plains with potential 
warning levels early Monday morning as the strongest low level 
flow develops per the deepening sfc low. Model soundings, progged 
BL winds, and sfc to h750 flow confirms two LLJ cores, one just NE
of the BH on the plains (affecting the Sturgis foothills and 
southern Meade County zone) and the other over the southern BH. 
Attm, have bumped winds up in the adv for the SD plains in the lee
of the BH, mentioning gusts up to 60 mph. However, felt a high 
wind warning was warranted in the southern BH given expected mix 
down of fast flow at times per the impressive 4-6 mb pressure 
gradient across the BH there, combined with terrain effects and 
wind gusts around 60 mph there could certainly lead to tree 
damage. Sfc low and upper trough will quickly exit the region 
Monday with precip mainly ending by late morning. Winds will also 
quickly wane in the afternoon. Cold conds expected Monday night 
with clear skies. Seasonably cool conds then expected for the 
remainder of the week with numbers just below or around seasonal 
norms. Chances for rain/snow then return Wed night as a weak 
impulse crosses the region.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS Through 18Z Monday)
Issued At 1141 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

IFR and MVFR conditions can be expected for much of the TAF period
as a winter system moves through the region, primarily for
northeastern Wyoming and the Black hills areas. KRAP may see brief
MVFR/IFR conditions as well. This cold front will bring gusty 
northwest winds (40kts) behind it slowly spreading west to east.

&&

.UNR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SD...Winter Weather Advisory from 9 PM this evening to noon MDT 
     Monday for SDZ001-012-025.
     Wind Advisory from midnight tonight to 3 PM MDT Monday for 
     SDZ002-014-032.
     Wind Advisory until 3 PM MDT Monday for SDZ013-026-031-072-073.
     Winter Weather Advisory from 6 PM this evening to noon MDT 
     Monday for SDZ024-028.
     High Wind Warning from 9 PM this evening to noon MDT Monday for 
     SDZ027-029.
WY...Winter Weather Advisory from 6 PM this evening to noon MDT 
     Monday for WYZ056-057-071.
     Winter Weather Advisory until noon MDT Monday for WYZ054-055.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...JC
AVIATION...Dye
