FXUS63 KUNR 231744
AFDUNR

Area Forecast Discussion For Western SD and Northeastern WY
National Weather Service Rapid City SD
1144 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 923 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Deep upper trough and assocaited frontal wave continues to push
east today. Rain ahas transitioned quicker to snow this morning 
in Campbell County, and so have decided push the start time of the
adv to now. Have raised winds across the area through Monday 
morning in line with model trends, esp the HRRR. A high wind 
warning may be needed in the lee of the BH and the southern BH 
given bufr progs and BL winds in hires models.

&&

.DISCUSSION...(Today Through Saturday)
Issued at 316 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Current surface analysis shows low pressure over northeast WY, 
with warm front extending eastward along the SD/NE border. Cold 
front extends southwest from the low into the central Rockies. 
Upper level analysis shows large scale trough over the western US,
with an embedded area of low pressure over northern ID. Strong 
jet wrapping around and east of the trough is bringing clouds over
most of the area, with main areas of pcpn now generally across 
central WY into MT. Temps remain mild, mainly 40s and 50s, with 
mostly light and variable winds. 

Much colder, windy, and unsettled weather is on the way for the next 
couple of days as the trough moves east through the region. The 
trough should eventually split as the system moves into the high 
plains, with the main energy tracking east-northeast from the 
northern Rockies to the northern Plains and then quickly into Canada 
later on Monday. Ensemble output is in good agreement at this point 
with more significant pcpn developing across our area from northeast 
WY to the northern Black Hills and into mostly far northwest SD 
later today through early Monday. Probabilities of a quarter to over 
a half inch of QPF are high in these areas, especially far northeast 
WY to the northern Black Hills, with potential amounts generally 
dropping off the further south and east you go across the CWA. 
Passing cold front today will result in a wide spread of high temps 
across the area, ranging from the lower 40s over Campbell County WY 
to the the 70s over south central SD. Temps will become cold enough 
for pcpn to change over to snow across much of northeast WY late 
this morning and afternoon and across the higher Black Hills during 
the afternoon. Snow levels will drop late today into tonight across 
the lower elevations of the Black Hills and onto the western SD 
plains as colder air pushes east. 

Winter weather advisories are in effect for a good portion of 
northeast WY into the northern Black Hills, where the more 
significant pcpn will result in mostly 2 to 5 inches of snowfall. 
Accumulations will likely be somewhat variable due to the warm 
ground and some melting with any daytime snow and also elevation 
dependent. Upslope enhancement of snow is expected over the 
northwestern Black Hills and parts of the Bear Lodge Mts tonight 
into Monday morning, where some higher amounts up to around 8 inches 
are very possible over the highest elevations. Amounts of 1 to 3 
inches are looking highly probable across Weston County and areas 
from Spearfish to Buffalo in far northwest SD. Any accumulations 
elsewhere across the rest of northwest and parts of west central SD 
are expected to mostly be an inch or less, with little or no snow to 
the south and southeast of the Black Hills. There is still some 
uncertainty on the exact track with regard to pcpn and snow 
potential, so these amounts could be adjusted some later today. 

The other concern with this system will be wind as a tight pressure 
gradient develops on the back side of the cold front and low 
pressure that moves east of the region later today. Wind gusts of 40 
to over 50 mph are likely late today into Monday across a good 
portion of the SD plains as the colder air pushes in. Wind 
advisories have been issued for the northwest and west central SD 
plains. Gusty winds further west across the area should also produce 
some blowing snow tonight into early Monday. 

The system will exit the area quickly on Monday, with lingering pcpn 
tapering off in the morning and winds decreasing late in the day. 
Cool conditions will persist, with highs mostly in the upper 30s and 
40s. Temps will rebound to near average levels for the rest of the 
week in most areas, with cooler than average temps over snow covered 
areas into midweek. A couple of weaker disturbances moving across 
the area through midweek could bring some showers at times, but a 
relatively dry pattern is expected for the rest of the week. Milder 
conditions will likely return by the weekend.    

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS Through 18Z Monday)
Issued At 1141 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

IFR and MVFR conditions can be expected for much of the TAF period
as a winter system moves through the region, primarily for
northeastern Wyoming and the Black hills areas. KRAP may see brief
MVFR/IFR conditions as well. This cold front will bring gusty 
northwest winds (40kts) behind it slowly spreading west to east.

&&

.UNR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SD...Winter Weather Advisory from 9 PM this evening to noon MDT 
     Monday for SDZ001-012-025.
     Wind Advisory from midnight tonight to 3 PM MDT Monday for 
     SDZ002-014-032.
     Wind Advisory from 3 PM this afternoon to 3 PM MDT Monday for 
     SDZ013-026-031-072-073.
     Winter Weather Advisory from 6 PM this evening to noon MDT 
     Monday for SDZ024.
WY...Winter Weather Advisory from 6 PM this evening to noon MDT 
     Monday for WYZ056-057-071.
     Winter Weather Advisory until noon MDT Monday for WYZ054-055.
&&

$$

Update...JC
DISCUSSION...26
AVIATION...Dye
