FXUS63 KABR 231713 AAB
AFDABR

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Aberdeen SD
1213 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1013 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Not much in the way of any changes to the forecast are expected
for the remainder of today. Low stratus deck hasn't materialized 
across southeast SD this morning, so expect mostly sunny skies 
through the day. Temperatures in these areas should top out around
80 degrees this afternoon. The more active weather still looks to
hold off until very late afternoon or early evening at the 
earliest when some convection is anticipated to develop across
southeast SD into east-central SD.

UPDATE Issued at 626 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Aviation discussion updated below for the 12Z TAFs.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 322 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A strong area of low pressure, currently over Colorado, will lift 
north-northeast across the region today through Monday afternoon. 
The surface low will bring much above average temperature into the 
eastern half of the CWA this afternoon with highs possibly reaching 
the low 80s. The HREF still suggests a low stratus deck developing 
over southeastern SD before 12Z. These clouds would move north-
northwest across the eastern half of the CWA through the early 
afternoon hours. These cloud could limit heating some today. A few 
models suggest showers developing with the warm air advection later 
this afternoon, mainly in southeastern ND and east into MN. This CWA 
may not see pcpn until after 21. This is when the HREF's ensemble 
probability of seeing 0.01 inches begins to increase across the far 
western portion of the CWA. The latest 6Z HRRR supports a mostly dry 
forecast for day period. Still appears as though late afternoon 
thunderstorms could develop over southeastern SD. Not a a lot of 
CAPE, but decent shear could cause a few stronger storms, with high 
winds the main threat. The latest day 1 outlook from SPC shows a 
marginal risk over the eastern CWA with a small area of slight in 
the far southeast corner of the CWA. Based on guidance from the HRRR 
and HREF, the outlook appears reasonable at this time. Aside from 
possible convection later this evening, the eastern half of the CWA 
may see very little to no QPF from this storm. Pops and QPF will be 
best on the backside of the surface low within the deformation zone. 
North central South Dakota could see the most QPF from this storm 
due to a longer period of deformation zone precipitation. As 
temperatures drop Sunday night, light accumulating snow will be 
possible in north central SD.

With the surface low located over southern ND late tonight, the 
western CWA will see increasing northwesterly winds with gusts of 40 
to 45 mph possible. As of now, the highest wind gusts should remain 
west of the Missouri River valley, and perhaps along the eastern 
side of the Sisseton Hills. Will issue a wind advisory for a few 
counties west of the Missouri River from 6Z to 21Z Monday. Later 
shifts may need to expand the wind advisory further east. The winds 
and pcpn chances will diminish Monday afternoon as the storms system 
moves northeast of the region.

.LONG TERM...(Monday Evening through Saturday)
Issued at 322 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Cooler temperatures will be in place throughout the extended period 
compared to what we've been seeing over the past few days. Typical 
fall temps of highs in the 40s and 50s with lows in the 20s and 30s 
will be common. Did make a slight adjustment downward for lows 
Tuesday night as surface high pressure settles overhead by 12Z 
Wednesday. Blended in 50 percent of the NBM25 lows, with another 
couple degree lowering in the James valley near ABR.

As for precipitation, will be watching the Wed night into Thurs 
period as a surface trough approaches and warm air advection 
overspreads the area.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 1209 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Terminals KABR,KATY,KPIR,KMBG

VFR skies/vsbys are forecast through midnight, after midnight MVFR
cigs are expected to advect east across the forecast area and then
linger into Monday morning. Isolated showers/storms are possible
this evening.  

&&

.ABR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SD...Wind Advisory from 1 AM to 4 PM CDT Monday for SDZ003-015-033.

MN...None.
&&

$$

UPDATE...Vipond
SHORT TERM...SD
LONG TERM...TMT
AVIATION...TDK
