FXUS63 KABR 232039
AFDABR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Aberdeen SD
339 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This Evening through Monday Night)
Issued at 339 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The primary focus in the short range will be the strong storm system 
will be moving across the Dakotas tonight through Monday. An 
elongated area of low pressure currently is situated from south-
central SD to north-east CO. Strong southeast winds ahead of this 
system have been persistent all afternoon across the eastern half of 
the CWA. Temperatures have responded, warming into the 70s and dew 
point temperatures have seen a nice recovery with readings currently 
in the low to mid 50s. Setting the stage first with the thunderstorm 
potential this evening. Warm air advection will continue this 
evening across our east/southeast ahead of a cold front. Expecting 
to see some convection develop across southeast SD late this 
afternoon or early evening and shift northeast with time. Also, 
expecting some convection to push across our east/southeast zones 
this evening. CAPE values remain negligible but there is and will 
be decent shear across these zones. A marginal risk for severe 
weather remains across zones east of the James Valley while our 
extreme southeast zones are under a slight risk. The main threat 
remains strong to damaging winds with any of the strongest storms.

As low pressure winds up and occludes as it moves into ND overnight 
into Monday morning, rain chances will increase across our western 
zones and over the Missouri Valley. These areas remain the best 
opportunity zones for measurable precipitation as they'll be within 
the deformation zone. Cold air will eventually get pulled in and 
advected southeastward into our western zones overnight. Still, the 
incoming air mass looks cold enough for rain to mix with or change 
to snow early Monday morning. Accumulation potential remains rather 
slim with perhaps a light coating in some areas of our northwest 
zones. Stronger low-mid level southwest flow overnight into the 
morning hours will promote increasing strong downslope winds across 
the Prairie Coteau. Precipitation chances should gradually diminish 
toward the midday hours, coming to an end across our central/western 
zones during the afternoon. Windy conditions and much cooler 
temperatures on Monday will make for a blustery day.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Sunday)
Issued at 339 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The recent highly amplified mid level pattern over the CONUS will 
gradually relax, and become a bit more progressive during the long 
term. However, even this more progressive pattern looks to continue 
the generally dry conditions over the Northern Plains. The highest 
chances for any measurable pcpn look to be around Wed night/Thu as a 
trof aloft tracks through the central CONUS, but QPF amounts look 
low. Temperatures, overall, look to average out right around or just 
a bit above normal for the vast majority of the forecast period.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 1209 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Terminals KABR,KATY,KPIR,KMBG

VFR skies/vsbys are forecast through midnight, after midnight MVFR
cigs are expected to advect east across the forecast area and then
linger into Monday morning. Isolated showers/storms are possible
this evening.  

&&

.ABR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SD...Wind Advisory from 1 AM to 4 PM CDT Monday for SDZ003>005-009-
     010-015>017-033>037.

MN...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...Vipond
LONG TERM...TDK
AVIATION...TDK
