FXUS63 KFSD 232042
AFDFSD

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Sioux Falls SD
342 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This Evening through Monday)
Issued at 330 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

KEY MESSAGES:

1. Strong winds and elevated fire danger continue into this evening.

2. Conditional severe weather threat still on track for this evening.

3. Cooler but mainly dry weather returns through the work week.

A lot to unpack over the next 12-18 hours, as a strong storm system 
lifts across the northern Plains. Early afternoon southerly winds 
have been gusting 30-40+ mph, near but holding just shy of advisory 
criteria so far. Stronger winds are evident to our southwest, with 
several locations in western Kansas seeing gusts in excess of 60 mph 
along with reduced visibility in blowing dust. The low to mid level 
jet responsible for this pocket of stronger winds lifts northeast 
toward eastern Nebraska and Iowa by this evening, compounded by 
typical diurnal enhancement of a southerly low level jet, with 
GFS/NAM/ECMWF all showing 850mb winds greater than 55kt sliding 
across our far eastern counties this evening. Given timing of this 
occurring after dark, think overall gusts will remain shy of high 
wind warning criteria. However, HREF does show a potential for 
surface gusts exceeding 50kt during the current advisory window 
(24/01Z-07Z), even away from convection, so will need to monitor 
upstream trends during the late afternoon/early evening.

As far as the late afternoon/early evening fire danger, dew points 
in the lower-mid 50s have spread a bit farther west than previously 
expected, in response to the storm track as a whole trending to the 
west. That said, already seeing relative humidity levels down into 
the mid 30s-mid 40s percent as of 2pm, and these will continue to 
drop as temperatures rise through the mid-late afternoon. Given the 
near advisory level winds and extremely dry vegetation, could see 
rapid fire spread even without humidity levels reaching the 20-25% 
threshold typically required for Red Flag Warning, so will continue 
that headline into the early evening when humidity levels should 
begin to recover after sunset. 

Additional concern for this evening remains convective potential, 
with some lingering uncertainty in exactly where/when storms may 
develop. Evidence of mid-level instability working through Iowa, 
with development of ACCAS over the past hour or two, with scattered 
surface-based storms developing in the deeper moisture in eastern 
Kansas. Given projected north-northeast storm movement, neither of 
these are likely to be our area of focus for this evening, though. 
Instead, will have to watch central/eastern Nebraska, as the 
approaching wave interacts with a strengthening dry line over 
central Nebraska. HRRR has been fairly consistent with isolated 
development in this area prior to 6pm, with activity quickly moving 
north-northeast across the Hwy 81/I-29 corridors this evening. Given 
the already strong/potentially increasing winds aloft and inverted-V 
soundings through the evening, along with any storms, or even just 
showers, will have the potential to bring severe winds to the 
surface. Hail will be a secondary threat with stronger storms with 
CAPE approaching 1000J/kg, but focus for this evening is really on 
the strong wind potential within the 6pm-11pm time frame. 

Once storms slide northeast of the area late evening, focus will 
shift to westerly winds wrapping into the area on the backside of 
the system, along with sharply cooler air compared to the past 
couple of days. May need to monitor our far west/northwest counties 
for a possible wind advisory late tonight into Monday morning, as 
850mb winds greater than 40kt wrap around the departing low into 
central South Dakota. However, strongest winds look to remain just 
west of our forecast area 09Z-15Z, and thus will hold off issuing 
any headlines for these areas at this time. Nevertheless, Monday 
will be a breezy and colder day, with westerly winds gusting 25-35 
mph and temperatures only rebounding to the upper 40s and 50s.


.LONG TERM...(Monday Night through Sunday)
Issued at 330 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

With much of the focus today on the near-term concerns, did not
have much time to dissect fine details through the mid-long range.
That said, does not appear to be much in the way of impactful
weather through that period. Looking at a largely split flow
pattern, with a couple of stronger southern stream waves tracking
well south of the area early in the work week, and a second toward
the end of the week. Weaker northern stream troughs slide across
the northern Plains. Could possibly see enough moisture stream
north to support a chance of showers mid-late week, but otherwise
seeing dry and seasonably cool conditions from Monday onward.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 1235 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Mostly VFR conditions are expected through the TAF period. 
Currently, mostly clear conditions continue across the area with 
southerly to southeasterly winds. By this evening, winds are 
expected to strengthen with the development of a low level jet just 
west of I-29. Not only will this bring some low level wind shear to 
KFSD and KSUX from 00z to 06z, but also will increase overall winds 
speeds across the area with gusts between 30-40 kts possible.

Isolated showers and thunderstorms are expected to develop ahead of 
a cold front moving through the area this afternoon. As a result,
TSRA was added to KFSD around 00z. Along with the system, cloud 
coverage should begin to increase bringing more low level stratus
especially west of the James River. As a result, KHON and a few 
smaller airports in our western counties could be in MVFR flight 
conditions for a few hours tomorrow morning. Otherwise, winds 
will shift westerly after the front passes through this evening
with mostly westerly flow continuing through the rest of the TAF 
period.


&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 330 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Humidity levels of 20 to 40 percent observed across much of our
SD/NE/IA counties as of 3 pm this afternoon, and could fall a bit
farther before a slow recovery after sunset. Greater concern will
be strong southerly winds, gusting to 35 to 45 mph across the
area. These winds, combined with the low humidity levels and very
dry vegetation continue to support a Red Flag Warning for through
the Missouri/James River Valleys, and eastward toward Sioux Falls
and much of northwest Iowa into the early evening.

Winds switch around to the west through tonight as a cold front
pushes east. Wind gusts in the wake of the cold front should
average 25 to 35 mph late tonight through Monday. However, near 
to below normal temperatures will persist through the week ahead, 
which should ease humidity levels back into 30-45 percent range
for Monday. 

&&

.FSD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SD...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM CDT this evening for SDZ038-050-
     052>054-057>071.

MN...None.
IA...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM CDT this evening for IAZ001-012>014-
     020>022-031-032.

     Wind Advisory from 7 PM this evening to 2 AM CDT Monday for 
     IAZ013-014-020>022-031-032.

NE...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM CDT this evening for NEZ013-014.

     Wind Advisory from 7 PM this evening to 2 AM CDT Monday for 
     NEZ014.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...JH
LONG TERM...JH
AVIATION...Gumbs
FIRE WEATHER...JH
