FXUS63 KARX 212336
AFDARX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service La Crosse WI
636 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.DISCUSSION...(This evening through Friday)
Issued at 255 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Key Messages:

 - Very warm this weekend with highs in the 70s to possibly near
   80

 - Strengthening southerly winds, especially Sunday into Monday,
   with gusts 30 to 40+ mph at times

 - Scattered showers/isolated storms possible by Sunday night,
   although rain amounts through Monday look light

Weekend Warmth:

Surface high pressure moves through overnight, and a surface low 
pressure system follows, moving into the region this weekend. Plenty 
of warm air advects into the region ahead of this system as 
southerly winds increase under a tightening pressure gradient. 
Greatest signal looks to be centered around 850 mb. The NAEFS and 
EPS have 850 mb temperatures in the greatest 99.5th percentile over 
the weekend with Saturday afternoon and Sunday evening maxing out 
compared to the model climatology.

Confidence is high for this weekend will be anomalously warm, but 
now the question is exactly how warm. Because model guidance has 
been under performing recently for temperatures, have increased the 
daytime maximums to be closer to the 75th percentile of the blended 
model guidance. Looking at the grand ensemble (CMC, EPS, GEFS), 
Saturday looks to be the warmest day this weekend. However, the 
spread between the 25th and 75th percentiles for maximum temperature 
is approximately 6 degrees across the forecast area. Whereas on 
Sunday, this spread is smaller at around 4 degrees, but the overall 
mean is lower too. In general afternoon temperatures in the upper 
60s to upper (mid) 70s can be expected on Saturday (Sunday).

Gusty Winds This Weekend into Monday:

As the surface low moves north eastward through the central plains, 
the pressure gradient increases across the region. Have increased 
winds a touch above the blended guidance as wind gusts across the 
forecast area by Sunday afternoon will likely be in the 30 to 40 mph 
range. A decent inversion setting up around 800 mb would be a 
limiting factor on how deep the mixed layer develops as depicted by 
forecast soundings. 

Strong southerly gradient flow will result in continued gusty
winds Sunday night into Monday. Despite the inversion/warm
advection, with the impressive low-level wind fields in play, 
there certainly remains support in model soundings and GEFS/EPS 
members for 35-40+ mph gusts Sunday night into Monday.

Rain/Storm Chances Late Sunday/Monday: 

A strong surface cyclone remains likely to lift north from the 
northern plains into western Ontario Sunday night into Monday as a 
shortwave trough ejects northeast within a broader longwave trough. 
Although the most impressive synoptic ascent will largely pass north 
and west of the area, strong northward moisture transport ahead of 
the low and mid-level warm advection with a lead shortwave trough 
will likely lead to scattered showers/isolated storms Sunday night 
with additional showers possible especially later Monday/Monday 
night with the low to mid-level front as cooling/lift erodes the 
cap. Even with the increase in deep layer moisture (NAEFS 
precipitable water anomalies in the 97%+ percentile for this time of 
year), rain amounts look to be light/spotty overall through the 
day on Monday with NBM/EPS probabilities for 1/2 inch of rain or 
higher mainly 20-30% or less. Chances for severe storms also 
appear low Sunday night given a stout warm nose and weak 
instability limiting surface-based convection/effective shear, in 
spite of strong low- level wind fields. Timing of the front is 
also unfavorable for stronger storms Sunday night and lapse rates 
weaken on Monday as the low-level boundary approaches

Tuesday-Friday:

Lower confidence exists through the middle to latter stages of next 
week, especially with precip chances. As the longwave trough to the 
west loses amplitude progressing east into the dominant eastern US 
ridge, models suggest a shortwave on its southern flank ejecting 
across the MS Valley later Tuesday into Wednesday. The large degree 
of spread in the 25th-75th percentile QPF among GEFS/CMC/EPS 
ensemble members north of the low track indicate substantial 
uncertainty in forecast outcomes, but a more northern track would 
provide a greater likelihood for rain during this time and a 
southerly solution would be drier. Even more uncertainty exists late 
in the week with some guidance bringing another trough east from the 
plains. There is higher confidence for cooler, more seasonable temps 
for much of the coming week.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 636 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR conditions remain likely to persist through the TAF 
period. Winds are expected to be light and variable for a time
tonight, increasing and becoming more southeast/south through the
day on Saturday. Winds could be gusty Saturday afternoon, with 
gusts up to 20+ kts possible. 

&&

.ARX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
WI...NONE.
MN...NONE.
IA...NONE.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...JM/Peters
AVIATION...EMS
