FXUS63 KGRB 212350
AFDGRB

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Green Bay WI
650 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Updated aviation portion for 00Z TAF issuance

.SHORT TERM...Tonight and Saturday
Issued at 217 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A weakening cold front was moving through the forecast area this
afternoon, accompanied by high clouds and a wind shift to the
west. Temperatures had warmed into the 60s and lower 70s in most 
locales.

The weak front will slowly sag south of the forecast area 
overnight. Light winds and patchy high clouds will prevail, which 
should allow temperatures to drop into thhe middle 30s to middle 
40s overnight. A few models produce patchy fog late tonight, but 
overall confidence in fog development is low.

On Saturday, the frontal boundary will shift back north as a warm
front. Sunny skies, increasing SE to S winds (gusting to 20 to 25
mph in the afternoon) and strong WAA will boost temperatures into
the upper 60s to middle 70s. Will use a blend of the warmest 
guidance sets for max temps.

.LONG TERM...Saturday Night Through Friday
Issued at 217 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A strong pressure gradient will reside over the forecast area
Saturday night into Sunday, in between low pressure developing in
the Northern Plains and high pressure over the eastern Great 
Lakes. Gusty southerly winds will continue to draw warm air into
the region, with much above normal temperatures anticipated.
Dry weather will continue, though clouds will likely increase on 
Sunday.

From Sunday night into Monday, the deep surface low is expected 
to track toward NW MN, while a 40 to 50 kt southwesterly low- 
level jet advects moisture (PWATs 1.25-1.50 inches) and elevated 
instability (MUCAPE 200-400 j/kg and steep mid-level lapse rates) 
into the forecast area. This will lead to showers and a few 
embedded thunderstorms Sunday night into Monday morning. A 
trailing cold front is expected to push into north central and 
central WI Monday afternoon, then work its way through the rest 
of the CWA Monday night. Showers will continue in association with
the frontal passage.

On Tuesday, the front should shift east of the region, with mainly
dry conditions expected over the western part of the forecast
area, and scattered light showers persisting in eastern WI. As a
strong short-wave ejects out of the base of a central U.S. upper 
trough, another surface low will develop in the southern plains, 
then lift northeast toward the Great Lakes Tuesday night into 
Wednesday. The current track, which is still uncertain, would 
bring another round of light to moderate rain to at least the Fox 
Valley and lakeshore areas during this period.

High pressure should return to the region late in the work week, 
along with mainly dry weather.

Temperatures will remain well above normal through Monday, before
the the cold front brings cooler temperatures for the rest of the
extended period. Despite the big change in temperatures, readings
will only drop to around climatological normals for the rest of 
the work week.
&&

.AVIATION...for 00Z TAF Issuance
Issued at 647 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR conditions are expected through the TAF period. A weak 
frontal boundary will slowly push south across the area overnight 
and will be of little consequence except for occasional high 
clouds. Some patchy MVFR/IFR fog is possible over northcentral 
Wisconsin late tonight, so continued TEMPO group for fog at RHI. 
South to southeast winds will become gusty late Saturday morning 
as a warm front pushes back northward. By the end of the TAF 
period some LLWS is possible as a nocturnal southwesterly LLJ 
develops after sunset.
&&

.GRB WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM.....Kieckbusch
LONG TERM......Kieckbusch
AVIATION.......ESB
