FXUS63 KMKX 220200
AFDMKX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Milwaukee/Sullivan WI
900 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.UPDATE...
(Issue 900 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022)

Temperatures are cooling quickly across central Wisconsin where
the pressure gradient has relaxed and wind have become calm. As a
result, did lower temperatures for tonight especially for areas 
northwest of Highway 151. We should see a few areas across
Marquette/Green Lake/Sauk counties drop into the upper 30s/lower
40s. Elsewhere lows will fall into the upper 40s/upper 50s, 
warmest across southeast Wisconsin.

Anderson

&&

.SHORT TERM...
(Issued 359 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022)

Tonight through Saturday night:

Temperatures definitely over-achieved today. Highs are topping out
in the mid to upper 70s for most places, with a few spots in the
Kettle Moraine at 73. Southwest winds are gusting to 28 to 35 
mph. 

The gusty southerly winds will subside around sunset this 
afternoon as weak high pressure briefly moves through WI.
Temperatures will remain mild tonight thanks to the warm air that
moved in this afternoon and will remain overhead. 

Saturday highs should be similar to today or just a notch higher,
along with the winds although the direction will be more 
southerly than southwest. This is due to a tightening pressure
gradient with low pressure developing in the Plains. We should
remain breezy and mild all through Saturday night.  

Cronce

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Issued 359 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022)

Sunday through Friday:

With strong low pressure siting over the Plains and lifting into
northwest MN by Monday morning, southern WI will have persistent
gusty southerly winds and warmer than normal temperatures through
Monday. We can expect scattered showers with a few rumbles of
thunder Sunday night, primarily after midnight. This is due to a 
surge of warm air advection and vorticity advection out ahead of 
the strong low over the Northern Plains. 

The majority of the showers should end by Monday morning with
drier low level flow moving in, but there is still a chance 
thanks to increasing precipitable water values. The surface
front will very slowly make its way eastward through southern WI
Monday night into Tuesday morning. There is a good chance of 
showers along the front. 

The ECMWF still has a more progressive low than the GFS, so the
precip chances on Tuesday night into Wednesday are still highly 
uncertain.

Cronce

&&

.AVIATION...
(Issued 900 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022)

VFR conditions are expected over the next 24 hours. While winds
are light at the surface, just above the surface enhanced winds
from the southwest gusting upwards of 45 knots will bring
concerns for LLWS for terminals across southeast Wisconsin. After
sunrise on Saturday morning, expect the gusty winds to return to 
all terminals and linger through the afternoon hours. Winds will 
be more southerly on Saturday, taking on a bit more of a southeast
component near Lake Michigan. Saturday night it does look like we
will maintain breezy conditions at the surface. 

Anderson

&&

.MARINE...
(Issued 359 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022)

The majority of the southerly winds are remaining just below gales
this afternoon. Winds will diminish tonight and then increase
again Saturday. The current Small Craft Advisory is in effect 
until midnight. We hoisted another S.C.A. which is in effect from
9 am to 7 pm Saturday. 

There is a threat for gales Sunday afternoon into Monday morning.
In fact, gusts will be quite apparent with strong warm air 
advection from the south-southwest during this period. Stay tuned 
if you have plans on or near the lake as the latter part of the 
weekend approaches.

Cronce

&&

.MKX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
WI...None.
LM...Small Craft Advisory...LMZ643-LMZ644-LMZ645-LMZ646 until 
     midnight Saturday.

     Small Craft Advisory...LMZ643-LMZ644-LMZ645-LMZ646...9 AM 
     Saturday to 7 PM Saturday.

&&

$$

Visit us at weather.gov/milwaukee

Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube at:
www.facebook.com/NWSMilwaukee
www.twitter.com/NWSMilwaukee
www.youtube.com/NWSMilwaukee
