FXUS62 KGSP 231706
AFDGSP

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Greenville-Spartanburg SC
106 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Warm and dry conditions are expected to continue into the first half 
of the week before a weak frontal system brings a small chance of 
rain by mid-week. Warm and dry conditions return behind the front 
through the end of the work week.  Expect rain chances to possibly 
increase again next weekend as low pressure approaches from the Gulf 
states.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 105 PM EDT Sunday: A short wave ridge builds over the area 
through Monday as low pressure moves up the Atlantic Coast and a 
frontal system approaches from the west. A surface ridge remains 
over the are through the period, although the weak center of high 
pressure slowly slides eastward through the period. Expect generally 
light winds turning more southerly with time. Only patches of thin 
cirrus are expected from time to time. Have undercut the model blend 
for lows again with good radiational conditions expected. Lows will 
be around 5 degrees below normal. Highs should warm slightly Monday 
with thicknesses increasing, along with the light southerly flow. 
Highs will be around 5 degrees above normal.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
As of 255 am EDT Sunday: The upper ridge atop the region will weaken 
between weak upper low off the Southeast Coast, and an occluding 
cyclone lifting from the southern Great Plains early Tuesday to the 
Ohio Valley by the end of the period. Weakening/occluded front will 
approach the forecast area Tue night/early Wed. In the interim, 
conditions will remain dry and warm...temps generally a few degrees 
above climo. PoPs begin to ramp up across western area in advance of 
the front by the end of Tuesday, ramping up to solid chance to 
low-end likely across the western 1/3 of the CWA overnight/early 
Wed. A consensus of model guidance continues to indicate no 
pre-frontal instability along with a weakening of the frontal 
circulation and associated precip band as the front advances toward 
and across the forecast area early Wed. As such, PoPs diminish 
sharply toward eastern areas, with at best slight chances advertised 
across the eastern third of the area. Any precip chances should be 
more or less done by Wed afternoon, with little in the way of 
notable air mass change expected in the wake of the front.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SATURDAY/...
As of 310 am EDT Sunday: An upper ridge will build across the East 
early in the extended...downstream of the next round of height falls 
overspreading the central Conus. As such, dry and seasonably warm 
conditions are expected to persist through the end of the work week. 
Forecast confidence then diminishes next weekend, as global models 
are not in the greatest agreement regarding the strength and timing 
of a southern Conus upper low during the late week time frame. The 
Canadian/ECMWF camp is more well-developed/wetter with the feature 
as it passes over the Southeast during the weekend, while the GFS is 
more suppresses. However, the models have displayed rather poor 
internal run-to-run consistency over the past day or so. For the 
time being, there's enough of a signal to ramp PoPs up over the 
weekend, but given the uncertainty, chances are generally capped in 
the 30-40% range for the time being. With the potential for precip 
looming, temps taper down to around normal late in the period.

&&

.AVIATION /17Z SUNDAY THROUGH THURSDAY/...
At KCLT and elsewhere: VFR forecast for all locations as surface 
ridge and developing upper ridge dominate the weather pattern. 
Although weak, the high pressure center slowly migrates eastward 
with time turning winds form a more northerly direction to a more 
southerly one. This has already taken place at KAND but won't happen 
at KCLT until Monday. Winds will be light nonetheless this afternoon 
and Monday and near calm overnight. Expect only patches of thin 
cirrus from time to time through the period. Only a low chance of 
mountain valley fog overnight. 

Outlook: Dry high pressure moves east Tuesday as a weak frontal 
system moves east and brings a small chance of rain and associated 
restrictions Tuesday night and Wednesday. Mtn valley fog will become 
increasingly likely each morning. Dry, VFR conditions return for 
Thursday.

&&

.GSP WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
GA...None.
NC...None.
SC...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...DEO
NEAR TERM...RWH
SHORT TERM...JDL
LONG TERM...JDL
AVIATION...RWH
