FXUS62 KCHS 231718
AFDCHS

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Charleston SC
118 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Dry high pressure will remain over the area through next
Tuesday. A weak cold front should then move through mid week,
followed by high pressure into late week. Low pressure should
arrive next weekend with unsettled conditions. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
The closed low offshore will lift north toward the North 
Carolina Outer Banks, while high pressure in the Gulf of Mexico 
expands into parts of the Southeast and Tennessee Valley. At the
surface, high pressure remains anchored inland, helping to keep
low pressure along an old baroclinic zone offshore as it heads 
north with the mid level low. There is so much dry air that 
remains in place, with PWat just 40-60% of normal. With plenty 
of insolation, some expansion of the low level thickness and 
temps starting out higher than lately, a warmer day will occur 
after our 5 day stretch of below-normal temps. Expect highs in 
the mid and upper 70s, with even some places hitting 80F south 
of I-16 in Georgia. 

Tonight: Amplified ridging aloft will build into the local area,
as the surface low in the ocean moves toward the Delmarva, and
high pressure persists inland. There's some high level clouds 
that will arrive from the west-northwest around the ridge, while
some stratus/stratocumulus could advect in from the north 
and/or form during the overnight with a strong inversion 
developing and some moisture within the boundary layer. While
the statistical guidance doesn't imply this scenario, the HREF,
SREF and simulated satellite imagery indicates that it can
occur. Depending upon what actually transpires will have
implications on min temps. But with light or calm winds, a
continued dry air mass, and persistence from recent nights, we
leaned toward the colder side of guidance.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
Aloft, a ridge of high pressure will expand across the Southeast 
United States in advance of a low tracking across the Central United 
States toward the Ohio River Valley. At the sfc, high pressure will 
prevail across the region, favoring a dry, but gradual warming trend 
under ridging aloft until a cold front arrives late Wednesday. The 
front should remain weak with not much of a change in overall temps 
or precip chances given limited moisture and forcing, but a few 
showers can not be ruled out Wednesday afternoon/evening near fropa.

In regards to temps, highs should range in the mid-upper 70s Monday 
with a few areas touching the 80 degree mark across southeast 
Georgia, then upper 70s to lower 80s Tuesday and Wednesday when mid-
lvl ridging is maximized and sfc winds turn southerly ahead of the 
approaching front. Overnight lows will also trend warmer with the 
southerly wind developing. In general, Monday night lows should 
range in the upper 40s well inland to low-mid 50s away from the 
immediate coast, then upper 50s to lower 60s away from the beaches 
Tuesday night.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY/...
A cold front will shift offshore Wednesday night, giving way to dry 
high pressure across the Southeast United States into late week.
A weak low pressure system should then approach the region next 
weekend while a coastal trough lingers offshore, potentially 
bringing unsettled weather conditions across the local area. 
Instability appears limited given the potential of high pressure 
building across the area from the north and some uncertainty in the 
overall strength and track of low pressure approaching the region, 
but few to scattered showers are possible across most areas Saturday 
and Sunday. High temps should range in the upper 70s/lower 80s 
through late week, followed by cooler highs in the mid-upper 70s 
Saturday, then low-mid 70s Sunday. Lows should generally range in 
the mid-upper 50s well inland to low-mid 60s closer to the coast.

&&

.AVIATION /17Z SUNDAY THROUGH THURSDAY/...
VFR will prevail through 18Z Monday. While there is some
evidence of fog development and/or low clouds, have left out any
mention of flight restrictions for now. 

Extended Aviation Outlook: VFR conditions should prevail at 
KCHS/KJZI/KSAV terminals through mid week. However, brief flight 
restrictions are possible with a passing cold front late
Wednesday.

&&

.MARINE...
Today and tonight: The gradient across the local waters will 
remain somewhat pinched between strong high pressure inland and 
low pressure and a stationary front further offshore. This will 
generate mainly N or NE winds of 10-20 kt, perhaps veering more 
E this afternoon and early evening due to sea breeze influences,
especially over the Georgia waters. Seas will have a somewhat 
favorable fetch and a bit swell energy to produce significant 
wave heights of 3 to 5 ft, except for 6 footers beyond about 40 
nm off the Georgia coast. It is on those waters (AMZ374) where 
we have a Small Craft Advisory due to the 6 foot seas.

Monday through Thursday: The pressure gradient will gradually weaken 
across local waters as high pressure becomes centered across the 
Southeast United States. North-northeast winds should top out near 
15 kt with seas ranging between 3-5 ft Monday, highest across 
offshore Georgia waters. Thereafter, high pressure will gradually 
weaken with the approach of a cold front mid-week, supporting 
southerly winds around 10 kt or less while seas subside to 2-3 ft. 
Fropa will be weak Wednesday night, favoring conditions that remain 
well below Small Craft Advisory levels across all local waters 
heading into Thursday.

&&

.TIDES/COASTAL FLOODING...
Astronomical influences from the upcoming new moon and favorable 
north-northeast winds suggest a potential for elevated tide cycles 
starting early this week. Tides could reach minor coastal flood 
levels with the morning and evening high tides in the Charleston 
Harbor mid to late week.

&&

.CHS WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
GA...None.
SC...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 6 AM EDT Monday for AMZ374.

&&

$$

NEAR TERM...
SHORT TERM...
LONG TERM...
AVIATION...
MARINE...
TIDES/COASTAL FLOODING...
