FXUS62 KGSP 231900
AFDGSP

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Greenville-Spartanburg SC
300 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Warm and dry conditions are expected to continue into the first half 
of the week before a weak frontal system brings a small chance of 
rain by mid-week. Warm and dry conditions return behind the front 
through the end of the work week.  Expect rain chances to possibly 
increase again next weekend as low pressure approaches from the Gulf 
states.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 105 PM EDT Sunday: A short wave ridge builds over the area 
through Monday as low pressure moves up the Atlantic Coast and a 
frontal system approaches from the west. A surface ridge remains 
over the are through the period, although the weak center of high 
pressure slowly slides eastward through the period. Expect generally 
light winds turning more southerly with time. Only patches of thin 
cirrus are expected from time to time. Have undercut the model blend 
for lows again with good radiational conditions expected. Lows will 
be around 5 degrees below normal. Highs should warm slightly Monday 
with thicknesses increasing, along with the light southerly flow. 
Highs will be around 5 degrees above normal.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
As of 245 PM EDT Sunday: The short-term fcst picks up at 00z on 
Tuesday with broad upper ridging still in place over the Eastern 
CONUS as a robust southern stream upper trof translates eastward
over Texas and Oklahoma. The trof will likely morph into a closed
low as it approaches our area on Tuesday and then climb up and 
over the ridge and pass to our north on Wednesday as the period
ends. At the sfc, elongated/broad high pressure will still be in 
place over our area as the period begins late Monday. Over the 
next 24 to 36 hours, the high will gradually weaken as a sfc low 
develops over the ArkLaTex region and moves its associated occluded 
front to our doorstep by late Tuesday. The front is still expected
to move thru our CWA early Wednesday and should be east of our
fcst area by the end of the period late Wednesday. It's still 
looking pretty dry with PoPs capped at high-end chance across 
our western zones and brief, slight chance over our eastern-most
zones. QPF should generally be 0.25 inches or less across our 
area. High temps should be about a category above normal both 
Tues and Wed with lows warming thru the period as dewpoints 
increase.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY/...
As of 215 PM EDT Sunday: The extended fcst picks up at 00z on Thurs 
with an embedded upper trof/low lifting NE and "climbing" the stout 
upper ridge that has been in place over the Atlantic Coast for days. 
In its wake, heights will rebound modestly and upper ridging will 
persist over the Southeast thru the end of the work week. On Fri, 
another robust southern stream trof will translate eastward across 
Texas and Oklahoma and approach our area over the weekend. At the 
sfc, what's left of an occluded front will be moving off the Atlantic
Coast as the period begins late Wed/early Thurs. In the front's wake, 
broad high pressure will spread back over the region from the NW and 
linger to our north thru Fri. On Sat, another sfc low is expected to 
develop somewhere over the Gulf Coast and bring increasing moisture 
to our area thru the weekend as it lifts NE. At the same time, the 
center of the above-mentioned high will slide over New England and
help establish a wedge pattern over the western Carolinas. As for 
the sensible fcst, Thurs and Fri should be dry with temperatures
a few degrees above climatology. Precip chances ramp up over the 
weekend with a solid chance for widespread rainfall beginning Sat
afternoon. High temps are expected to cool to just below climatology
for Sat and Sun.

&&

.AVIATION /19Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
At KCLT and elsewhere: VFR forecast for all locations as surface 
ridge and developing upper ridge dominate the weather pattern. 
Although weak, the high pressure center slowly migrates eastward 
with time turning winds form a more northerly direction to a more 
southerly one. This has already taken place at KAND but won't happen 
at KCLT until Monday. Winds will be light nonetheless this afternoon 
and Monday and near calm overnight. Expect only patches of thin 
cirrus from time to time through the period. Only a low chance of 
mountain valley fog overnight. 

Outlook: Dry high pressure moves east Tuesday as a weak frontal 
system moves east and brings a small chance of rain and associated 
restrictions Tuesday night and Wednesday. Mtn valley fog will become 
increasingly likely each morning. Dry, VFR conditions return for 
Thursday.

&&

.GSP WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
GA...None.
NC...None.
SC...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...DEO
NEAR TERM...RWH
SHORT TERM...JPT
LONG TERM...JPT
AVIATION...RWH
