FXUS62 KCAE 231804
AFDCAE

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Columbia SC
204 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Temperatures continue to moderate as high pressure and dry air 
will remain dominant across the region into early week. The 
next front will cross the region on Wednesday however the chance
of rain is low. Near to slightly above normal temperatures
expected through next week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
The highly dry airmass continues to provide fair conditions and
clear skies. The upper low off the coast will continue to push
away and the only clouds that will linger behind it will be some
scattered cirrus. Surface high pressure will move slowly
northeast and will be more directly over the area later tonight.
This will allow for variable, light winds around sunset becoming
calm at times overnight. Radiational cooling will be excellent 
again tonight with lows in the low to mid 40s.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY THROUGH TUESDAY/...
The forecast area will be in between weak upper troughing off 
the coast to our east and a slow moving upper trough and upper 
low to our west moving into the Plains states and Mississippi 
Valley region. This will allow upper level ridging to build over
the forecast area early this week. Atmospheric moisture remains
low with values around 40-60 percent of normal and remaining 
below 0.75 inches. Forecast soundings indicate plenty of 
sunshine is expected and temperatures should be near to slightly
above normal with highs in the 70s to near 80 degrees and lows 
in the 40s on Monday night.

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SATURDAY/...
The approaching upper trough and associated surface low to our 
west will lift northeastward through the Ohio Valley Tuesday 
night as a band of higher PWATs over 1 inch pushes into the 
region through Wednesday. Despite the increased moisture, the 
significant forcing will remain north of the area and moisture 
transport wanes along the approaching front as it gets stretched
out and no available instability. Will continue to carry slight
chance pops late Tuesday night but no significant rainfall is 
expected. 

Ensembles show a dry slot moving over the area on Wednesday as 
the upper trough lifts into the eastern Great Lakes region with 
PWATs again dropping below normal as the 500mb flow becomes 
zonal. Surface high pressure will build back over the area 
through the end of the week with dry weather expected. 

Ensemble 500mb flow becomes amplified again by Friday with yet 
another shortwave trough digging into the intermountain west and
cutting off as it moves into the southern Plains. Southwesterly
flow aloft will develop downstream of this feature and allow 
PWATs to rise again to above normal values over the weekend. 
Ensemble guidance is in reasonable agreement showing the closed 
low drifting into the southeastern states and opening while 
slowing down which will bring much needed rain chances to the 
forecast area over the weekend. However, the details remain 
uncertain and will carry low chance pops at this time. 
Temperatures during this period will be near to slightly above 
normal.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
VFR conditions expected through the TAF period.

Dry airmass will continue to keep skies clear over the period and
conditions VFR. Some passing cirrus over Augusta terminals 
otherwise clear. Variable wind for the remainder of the evening 
favoring the north northeast as surface high pressure traverses 
the forecast area and over the TAF sites. Calm after sunset. Low
confidence in any steam fog forming overnight at AGS/OGB.

EXTENDED AVIATION OUTLOOK...No significant impacts to aviation 
expected through Friday.

&&

.CAE WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
GA...None.
SC...None.

&&

$$
