FXUS62 KCHS 231929
AFDCHS

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Charleston SC
329 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Dry high pressure will remain over the area through Tuesday. A
weak cold front should move through the area mid week, followed
by high pressure into late week. Low pressure should then
arrive and produce a period of unsettled weather next weekend. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM MONDAY MORNING/...
Today and tonight: Low pressure across the Atlantic will shift 
further northeast and away from the region as high pressure prevails 
across inland areas. Overall, a quiet evening and overnight is 
expected. As in recent nights, the temperatures and cloud cover will 
be somewhat challenging. From sounding data, the area looks to 
remain cloud free but the SREF/HREF both bring in some clouds. If 
the latter pans out, temperatures could be warmer than currently 
forecast. But for now, have maintained a cooler than guidance low 
temperature forecast. As of note, there are some hints of fog 
development, especially across far SE GA where condensation
pressure deficits will be quite low but due to inconsistencies 
in the models, have left out any mention.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM MONDAY MORNING THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
Monday and Tuesday: Deep-layered high pressure and associated 
subsidence will ensure rain-free conditions and normal to slightly 
above-normal temperatures. After starting the day in the 40s inland 
and 50s closer to the coast, Monday afternoon temperatures should 
recover into the middle/upper 70s, highest across inland SE GA. Monday 
night, coverage of 40s will diminish well inland, while lows in the 
50s will prevail elsewhere. Mainly clear skies, light winds and low 
temperature/dewpoint spreads could translate to patchy radiation 
fog later Monday night into early Tuesday. However, model signals 
for significant fog remain unimpressive. Tuesday afternoon, 
temperatures should top out in the upper 70s to lower 80s away from 
the beaches, highest across interior SE GA. Tuesday night, ahead of 
an approaching cold front lows will range from the 50s inland to 60s 
near the coast. A tightening surface pressure gradient/persist 
surface flow should limit the potential for significant fog. Then, a 
few showers could push into far inland counties late.   

Wednesday: Ahead of an approaching cold front, winds will turn to 
the southwest, and temperatures should recover at least into the 
upper 70s to lower 80s. A few locations could even push into the 
middle 80s. Meanwhile, while the parent upper low and associated 
forcing for ascent will weaken/shift north of the region with time 
Wednesday, there exists at least some potential for pre-frontal 
showers due to influence of antecedent/organized convection upstream 
and a plume of elevated PWAT values/instability transported 
northward by the remnants of the warm conveyor belt. Thus, in line 
with trends from multiple deterministic models we raised very low 
NBM PoPs to slight chance, across the southern 2/3 of the forecast 
area 12-18z and closer to the coast during the afternoon/early 
evening. Also, we cannot rule out an isolated thunderstorms or two, 
especially across SE GA, but the probability for thunder remains too 
low to justify a mention within the latest forecast. 

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY/...
In wake of weak cold fropa, any showers will push offshore Wednesday 
evening, then high pressure will expand across the region through 
late week. Near to slightly above normal high temperatures 75-80F, 
highest across interior SE GA, should be common Thursday and Friday. 
As an inland wedge of high pressure/coastal trough regime evolves, 
isolated/scattered showers over coastal waters could expand into 
coastal counties, especially late Friday and Friday night. Then, 
this weekend deep-layered low pressure should track slowly northeast 
from the Gulf Coast/lower MS River Valley, and intensifying moisture 
transport/overrunning of the surface wedge of high pressure will 
translate to increasing PoPs. While this could evolve into a 
significant rain event for at least parts of our region, many 
critical details remain in flux. Thus, PoPs remain very conservative 
this weekend, and future significant forecast adjustments could be 
required. 

&&

.AVIATION /20Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
VFR will prevail through 18Z Monday. While there is some
evidence of fog development and/or low clouds, have left out any
mention of flight restrictions for now. 

Extended Aviation Outlook: Low probabilities for patchy radiation fog 
will develop late Monday night into early Tuesday. Also, brief 
flight restrictions are possible with a passing cold front Wednesday 
into Wednesday evening. Otherwise, mainly VFR expected at all 
terminals. 

&&

.MARINE...
Today and tonight: The pressure gradient will gradually relax over 
the evening hours. Therefore, the Small Craft Advisory for the outer 
Georgia waters will end at 8 pm. Thereafter, north to northeast 
winds will prevail at less than 15 knots. Seas will be less than 5 
feet.

Monday through Friday: This period will be marked by wind 
speeds/seas below Small Craft Advisory thresholds. High pressure 
centered north of the waters will continue to produce mainly N/NE 
winds through Tuesday, although the daily sea breeze/nightly land 
breeze could produce periods of onshore/offshore winds close to the 
immediate coast, in all cases mainly 10 knots or less. Then, ahead 
of an approaching cold front, winds will veer through the SE Tuesday 
night to SW Wednesday, and winds Wednesday afternoon/evening could 
increase to at least 10-15 knots with gusts 15-20 knots. In the wake 
of cold fropa Wednesday night into Thursday, another high pressure 
will build from the north, and winds will shift and veer toward the 
N/NE and will persist through Friday. As a coastal trough develops 
and tightens the pressure gradient, a few NE gusts could approach 
SCA levels Friday. Seas should generally average 2-4 feet through 
this period.   

&&

.TIDES/COASTAL FLOODING...
Astronomical influences from the new moon (Oct 25) and the upcoming 
lunar perigee (Oct 29) will drive elevated tides this week. Morning 
tides will approach or could briefly breach minor coastal flood 
levels along the SC coast from Edisto Beach to South Santee River, 
including areas around Charleston Harbor. However, changeable wind 
direction could limit the impact of meteorological forcing/ 
associated tidal departure, and the margin error will be tight, so 
the prospects for morning tides reaching 7 feet MLLW in Charleston 
Harbor remain somewhat uncertain Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday 
mornings. 

&&

.CHS WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
GA...None.
SC...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 8 PM EDT this evening for AMZ374.

&&

$$

NEAR TERM...RAD
SHORT TERM...SPR
LONG TERM...SPR
AVIATION...RAD/SPR
MARINE...RAD/SPR
TIDES/COASTAL FLOODING...
