FXUS61 KCTP 220217
AFDCTP

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service State College PA
1017 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Pattern flip from cold to warm gets into full swing today with 
noticeably milder temperatures expected into the weekend. A 
coastal storm could bring some light rain on Sunday; otherwise
expect dry weather and above normal temperatures into the middle
of next week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM SATURDAY MORNING/...
Surface ridge and associated dry air mass along the east coast
should ensure clear and cool conditions tonight with efficient
radiational cooling and lows in the 30s. The air mass in 
general is moderating, so it should be several degrees milder 
than last night. Ensemble 2m temp plumes indicate readings could
be closer to 10 degrees above those of last night across the 
northwest mountains, where a light southerly breeze should 
persist through dawn.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM SATURDAY MORNING THROUGH SATURDAY NIGHT/...
Rising heights and surface ridging will ensure abundant sunshine
again Saturday, with afternoon highs several degrees higher than
today. Model 900mb temps around 11C should translate to highs in
the mid to upper 60s over most of the area. Similar to today,
expect NBM dewpoints to bust on the high side based on very dry
air above a weak inversion. Have leaned heavily toward the drier
LAMP guidance. 

Low level moisture creeps up just a bit Sat night, which could
allow patchy valley fog to form toward dawn. Conditions remain 
favorable for radiational cooling with surface ridge parked over
central Pa, but air mass will continue to moderate, so expect 
lows a few degrees milder than tonight, mainly in the upper 30s 
to low 40s.

&&

.LONG TERM /SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
There remains some uncertainty for our weather by Sunday, as a 
coastal low is progged to develop off the Carolina Coast and 
track northward just offshore. This system will generate 
easterly flow across the area and could push clouds and even
a period of rain westward into the region Sunday PM. Latest
guidance indicates the eastern third of the forecast area stands
a decent chance of rain late Sunday into Sunday night. 

The extended models appear to be coming into agreement on an
stretch of east/southeasterly flow the first half of next week.
This pattern would argue for a continuation of some cloudiness 
across at least eastern PA through midweek, where even a bit of 
drizzle is possible. An influx of low level moisture off of the 
Atlantic and potential stratus should result in low temps well 
above normal. Despite very warm temps aloft, daytime highs may 
be tempered by stubborn low clouds. 

All medium range guidance tracks a weakening shortwave and
associated cold front through the region late Wednesday,
likely accompanied by scattered rain showers. Fair and mild 
weather looks probable Thursday, as high pressure builds in 
behind the front, then a developing easterly flow is likely by
late Friday, as the surface high drifts across New England while low
pressure develops off of the east coast.

&&

.AVIATION /02Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
VFR conditions to prevail. 

Warm air flowing over the state, especially in the northwest 
mountains, will create LLWS over BFD with shear of >30 knots in
the lowest 2kft there, but likely not as much shear/wind speed 
aloft elsewhere. Light to calm winds tonight will increase back 
to around 5 knots or so on Saturday while remaining out of the 
south.

The next forecast question deals with the approach of a low 
pressure area (or mainly an inverted trough) along but generally
just off the east coast. It could bring winds out of the NE and
lead to some lowered ceilings and very light rain (mainly for 
the eastern airfields) on Sunday. Will continue to monitor just
how far inland that --RA will get. IPT, MDT, & LNS are most at 
risk for lowered cigs/vsby. 

Parts are on order for the KJST vsby sensor. Note that KJST is 
not automatically reporting vsby at this time. Tower personnel 
may augment/add the vsby as they observe it. There will be no 
TAF amendments (to vsby) when the vsby is missing.

Outlook...

Sun-Mon AM...Although VFR is the most likely scenario, there is
a low chance that restrictive conditions (low cigs/light rain) 
could impact KIPT/KLNS/KMDT.

Mon PM-Tue PM...VFR/No sig wx.

Wed...SCT SHRA poss, mainly W. Generally VFR.

&&

.CLIMATE...
The growing season has now ended across all of Central PA. 
Therefore, no additional frost or freeze products will be issued
until the next growing season begins in the Spring of 2023.

&&

.EQUIPMENT...
Parts are on order for the KJST visibility sensor.

Scheduled maintenance on many regional ASOS sites will occur 
over the next few weeks. Interruptions to mainly the wind sensor
data, but, at times, much of the observation data, can be 
expected.

&&

.CTP WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Dangelo
NEAR TERM...Fitzgerald
SHORT TERM...Fitzgerald/Dangelo
LONG TERM...Fitzgerald/Evanego
AVIATION...Guseman/Dangelo
CLIMATE...
EQUIPMENT...
