FXUS65 KBOI 231614
AFDBOI

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Boise ID
1014 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.DISCUSSION...Looking at another cool and breezy day on the
backside of an exiting trough. Mountains will keep a chance of
light showers through the day while valleys remain dry. Winds will 
blow strongest across Baker County and open terrain of SW Idaho. 
There were pockets of freezing temperatures this morning at lower
elevation sites this morning, mostly in the Western Magic Valley.
Areas that did not freeze last night, will likely see freezing 
temperatures tonight. Current forecast is on track for today. 

&&

.AVIATION...Mainly VFR. Isolated IFR this morning in mountain
valleys through 18Z. MVFR in scattered snow showers across higher
elevations with local mountain obscuration through 00Z this
evening. Surface winds: Northwest 10-20kt with gusts to 30kt. 
Winds aloft at 10kft: North 15-30kt.


&&

.PREV DISCUSSION...
SHORT TERM...Today through Tuesday night...Cold northerly flow
today on the back side of the upper level low pressure system.
Along with the below normal temperatures today, expect breezy
westerly winds especially from Mountain Home through the Western
Magic valley. In addition, light snow showers will develop across
the West Central and Boise mountains for little to no snow
accumulation. Skies clear and wind diminish after sunset tonight.
This will allow temperatures to fall below freezing in the
Treasure and Western Magic Valleys Monday morning for the first
time this fall. The next system will bring precipitation Monday
afternoon across much of the area. Snow level will remain around
4500-5000 feet across the West Central Mountains. Light snow
accumulation are expected. Light rain is expected elsewhere.
Expect a brief break in the precipitation on Tuesday ahead of the
next stronger system moving into the region Tuesday night into
Wednesday. This system looks to be more favorable for accumulating
snowfall in the central Idaho mountains. Temperatures will remain
well below normal in the short term. 

LONG TERM...Wednesday through Sunday...Showers associated with an 
upper trough will continue on Wednesday. Snow levels will range from 
3500-4500 feet with snowfall totals of 1 to 4 inches above 4500 
feet. It will also be breezy and cold with valley highs mainly in 
the 40s. The showers will end Wednesday night as the trough exits to 
the east. Additional light snow accumulations of up to an inch are 
expected in the higher elevations. An upper ridge will arrive from 
the northwest on Thursday for dry conditions and light winds. Timing 
differences remain in the models with regard to the arrival of the 
next Pacific trough, but the overall trend is later into next 
weekend. Temperatures will remain 5-10 degrees below normal on 
Thursday, moderating to a few degrees below normal over the weekend. 

&&

.BOI WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
ID...Freeze Warning from midnight tonight to 10 AM MDT Monday 
     IDZ012-014-016.
OR...Freeze Warning from midnight tonight to 10 AM MDT Monday ORZ064.

&&

$$

www.weather.gov/Boise
www.facebook.com/NWSBoise
www.twitter.com/NWSBoise

DISCUSSION...DG
AVIATION.....DG
PREV SHORT TERM...JDS
PREV LONG TERM....BW
