FXUS65 KPIH 231750
AFDPIH

Area Forecast Discussion National Weather Service Pocatello ID 1150 
AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...Today and Monday. A quick update late this morning to 
expire remaining winter storm headlines. Models are not generally 
supportive of any additional heavy snow at the higher elevations 
although the Hires models continue to support some locally enhanced 
banding across the SE mountains late this afternoon and evening and 
to a lesser extent some pseudo-Snake Plain Convergent-looking 
activity across the Snake Plain late this afternoon. As a result, 
have maintained the chance to likely probability of precipitation in 
those regions going into the early evening. See the previous 
discussion below. Huston 

The bulk of snow today shifts into the eastern and southeast 
highlands, as well as portions of the Snake Plain. Outside of these 
areas, there will be snow showers redeveloping later this afternoon 
and evening with minimal snow amounts. Any impacts from snow and/or 
wind in these areas will be pretty localized. Because of this, we 
have cancelled the WINTER STORM WARNING for the central mountains a 
bit early. Across the eastern and southeast highlands, WINTER STORM 
WARNINGS remain in effect through Noon (northern zones) and 6pm 
(southeast corner), respectively. The day shift may need to 
reevaluate what to do with the timing of those headlines later due 
to continued snow/snow showers and some wind around. We are still 
watching for one or more bands of snow developing across the Snake 
Plain and into portions of the Magic Valley as the day progresses. 
The models may be a bit gung ho this morning for portions of the 
Plain from Idaho Falls south toward Pocatello, as nothing has 
developed that far south and west. However, a good majority of the 
models develop snow bands (and even some weak upslope along the 
benches) later this morning from around Idaho Falls down to between 
American Falls and Coldwater. That trend continues into the 
afternoon and early evening, and actually extending bit farther 
southwest to almost Burley before 6pm. Snow accumulations look to be 
less than an inch wherever these bands develop (up to 2" on the 
highest benches), although the potential of seeing between 1-2" 
across the Plain itself has jumped a bit to 25-35%. There will be 
some gusty west and northwest winds today (much lighter than 
Saturday), but impacts outside of blowing snow in the mountains 
should be minimal. We will see what snow this around early this 
evening quickly shifting east with northwest flow setting up heading 
into Monday. Tomorrow will be another breezy day ahead of the next 
storm. The main part of this one remains well to our northeast, but 
we will see a band of moisture bringing some light snow 
accumulations across the higher elevations. Little to no snow is 
forecast across the Snake Plain due to shadowing/downslope 
conditions. Temperatures today should no get out of the 40s in the 
lower valleys with 20s and 30s in the mountains. Tomorrow morning is 
still forecast to the coldest of the fall areawide, with 10s and 20s 
in the lower elevation and the mountains seeing from about 15 above 
to 10 below. Monday's highs will be within a couple of degrees of 
today.  Keyes

.LONG TERM...Tuesday through next Sunday.
A brief period of zonal flow will form over the region Tuesday 
afternoon as a shallow trough exits the region to the east and the 
next trough enters the Pacific Northwest.  It will passes through 
Idaho Wednesday into early Thursday before shifting southward in the 
vicinity of the Four Corners region.  As it continues further south, 
weak ridging will build over Idaho late Thursday into the first part 
of the weekend.  While operational models show very similar 
patterns, 500 mb ensemble clusters indicate differences in the depth 
of the trough as well as the timing of features by the end of the 
week.  By Saturday, clusters show a variety of scenarios, with 
uncertainty as to whether or not Idaho will be under a departing 
ridge or under an area of low pressure.  Winds will at least be 
breezy at times during the extended period as these systems move in, 
with NBM v4.1 forecasting gusts of at least 30 mph across the Snake 
River Plain and eastern Magic Valley Tuesday and Wednesday 
afternoons.  We have continued to blend with v4.1 to trend forecast 
winds upward.  Temperatures will remain below normal throughout the 
extended period and cold enough to support snow at all elevations, 
with rain and mixed precipitation falling across the Snake Plain and 
Magic Valley at times. Cropp &&

.AVIATION...Where we see snow today, look for mostly MVFR to IFR
weather due to visibility and ceilings...especially where we can get 
some decent snow showers or heavier bands of snow going.
Otherwise, we should be VFR. Winds will be gusty again today out of 
the west and northwest at 10-20kts sustained with some higher gusts. 
 Keyes &&

.FIRE WEATHER...The bulk of precipitation is now east of our region, 
with wrap-
around moisture bringing isolated to scattered precipitation through 
tonight.  Hi-res models show showers continuing throughout the day, 
with coverage increasing around 4 PM across all of eastern Idaho, 
and all moisture outside of the state by around midnight.  Snow 
levels are supportive of snow at valley floors.  Additional snowfall 
today will generally remain south and east of the Snake River Plain 
in Zones 411 and 413 as the low continues eastward.  Snow 
accumulations will likely be an inch or less across the valleys and 
around 1 to 5 inches above 7,000 feet through midnight.  Skies will 
clear west to east overnight tonight into tomorrow morning before 
another round of clouds moves in Monday evening ahead of the next 
approaching system.  Winds will be breezy again today, with 
sustained winds up to around 20 mph and 30 mph gusts.  Higher 
magnitudes will potentially be observed across Zones 425 and 427, as 
well as across the ridgelines in Zone 476. Although winds could 
reach critical thresholds at times, minimum humidities will remain 
above critical for the next week.  The next system to monitor will 
move in late Monday, which will be the first in a series of troughs 
to come out of the Pacific Northwest through late week. These will 
bring continued precipitation chances this week. Temperatures will 
remain around normal to below normal through the end of the week. 
Cropp/Keyes
&&

.PIH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$
