FXUS65 KPIH 231938
AFDPIH

Area Forecast Discussion 
National Weather Service Pocatello ID 
138 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...Tonight through Tuesday. Early afternoon satellite 
imagery was showing a broad upper low over the Wyoming Rockies 
lifting slowly NE with time. Numerical models, particularly the 
Hires models, continue to support some sort of quasi-Snake 
Convergent precipitation activity late this afternoon that drifts 
into the SE highlands. Looking at radar, some very weak returns are 
evident near Dubois drifting south and surface observations are 
generally supportive of some sort of convergence with the NNW flow 
dumping out of the CNTRL mountain-valleys and decent west flow over 
the Magic Valley. Thus I don't believe it would be prudent to pull 
the plug on the precipitation potential until we get through the 
evening hours. After that, with the low exiting NE of the region we 
should see clearing skies and plummeting temperatures under a north 
flow aloft. The next upstream disturbance, currently rotating into 
SW Alaska, is expected to dig SE into WRN Canadian tonight before 
shearing SE through the NRN Rockies and SE Idaho Monday night and 
Tuesday morning. This looks to be a fairly progressive short-wave 
which exits the region late Tuesday afternoon. Snow accumulations 
should be confined mainly to the Sawtooth region and the SE 
Highlands generally running at or below advisory levels. Thus no 
highlights are anticipated with this feature at this time. Daytime 
temperatures should remain a bit below normal through the period 
with breezy winds Monday and Tuesday. Huston

.LONG TERM...Tuesday night through next Sunday. An upper level 
trough will deepen as it moves in from the northwest Tuesday night. 
This will bring some moderately impactful winter weather to the 
region starting Wednesday. NBM 4.1 guidance shows a 50 to 60 percent 
chance of 4+ inches in the Sawtooth Range including Galena Summit, 
and around a 30% chance for 6+ inches in the same area. The same 
upper trough will bring strong winds across the Snake Plain 
Wednesday afternoon with peak gusts 35 to 40 mph. Deterministic 
models seem to be in fair agreement with the track and intensity of 
the upper trough. Ensemble clusters show some variance late in the 
week as the upper trough splits somewhere over the Colorado Front 
Range with also some variance on the strength of the upstream ridge. 
The weather in the latter half of the week and into Saturday looks 
dry, mainly because of said ridge. However, the ridge looks to 
quickly shift to the east Friday night with Saturday and Sunday 
trending wetter. Hinsberger 
&&

.AVIATION...Mid-level trough has passed to the east, but we're still 
dealing with some instability that will likely result in afternoon 
showers across the Snake Plain. VFR conditions are generally favored 
today, but snowshowers could briefly drop cig/vis to IFR. High-res 
models favor showers developing at PIH, IDA, and DIJ this afternoon. 
It appears less likely at BYI and SUN, but 3km NAM and HRRR show 
showers in the vicinity. Ridging will work its way in overnight, and 
there is potential for fog developing as skies clear. NBM and HREF 
guidance continue to favor VFR conditions overnight, and 
probabilities of visibility 3SM or less is highest in the Arco 
Desert/INL area and maybe a 15 to 25 percent chance of IFR VIS at 
IDA. Hinsberger
&&

.FIRE WEATHER...The bulk of precipitation is now east of our region, 
with wrap-around moisture bringing isolated to scattered 
precipitation through tonight.  Hi-res models show showers 
continuing throughout the day, with coverage increasing around 4 PM 
across all of eastern Idaho, and all moisture outside of the state 
by around midnight.  Snow levels are supportive of snow at valley 
floors.  Additional snowfall today will generally remain south and 
east of the Snake River Plain in Zones 411 and 413 as the low 
continues eastward.  Snow accumulations will likely be an inch or 
less across the valleys and around 1 to 5 inches above 7,000 feet 
through midnight.  Skies will clear west to east overnight tonight 
into tomorrow morning before another round of clouds moves in Monday 
evening ahead of the next approaching system.  Winds will be breezy 
again today, with sustained winds up to around 20 mph and 30 mph 
gusts.  Higher magnitudes will potentially be observed across Zones 
425 and 427, as well as across the ridgelines in Zone 476. Although 
winds could reach critical thresholds at times, minimum humidities 
will remain above critical for the next week.  The next system to 
monitor will move in late Monday, which will be the first in a 
series of troughs to come out of the Pacific Northwest through late 
week. These will bring continued precipitation chances this week. 
Temperatures will remain around normal to below normal through the 
end of the week. Cropp/Keyes 
&&

.PIH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$
