FPFJ40 NFFN 231500
Weather Bulletin
Issued from the National Weather Forecasting Centre Nadi
at 5:30am on Monday the 24th of October 2022

A STRONG WIND WARNING REMAINS IN FORCE FOR THE LAND AREAS OF YASAWA
GROUP, KADAVU AND NEARBY SMALLER ISLANDS, LAU AND LOMAIVITI GROUP.

A HEAVY RAIN ALERT REMAINS IN FORCE FOR THE WHOLE OF FIJI GROUP. 
For more information, refer to the special weather bulletin on heavy
rain issued by RSMC, Nadi on
https://www.met.gov.fj/index.php?page=warn1#20014.txt

Situation :  A trough of low pressure with associated cloud and rain
affects the eastern and northern parts of the country. A high
pressure system to the far southeast of Fiji directs a fresh to
strong southeast wind flow over the Fiji group. Meanwhile, an active
trough of low pressure lies slow moving to the far west of Fiji and
is anticipated to approach the group from Tuesday.
Forecast to midnight tonight for the Fiji group:
Over land areas of Yasawa group, Kadavu and nearby smaller islands,
Lau and Lomaiviti group: 
Strong southeast winds with an average speed of 45km/hr. Rough seas.
For the rest of the country : Moderate to fresh southeast winds.
Moderate to rough seas.

Occasional rain over the greater Suva/Nausori-Tailevu, Naitasiri &
Serua-Namosi, Kadavu and nearby smaller islands, Lau and Lomaiviti
groups, Cakaudrove and southern Bua. Elsewhere, fine apart from
isolated afternoon and evening showers. 
Isolated afternoon thunderstorms and heavy falls likely. 
Isolated heavy falls may lead to flash flooding of low lying areas. 


Outlook for Tuesday    : Strong southeast winds with speeds up to
45km/hr expected over land areas of Yasawa group, Kadavu and nearby
smaller islands, Lau and Lomaiviti group.  Rough seas.
Elsewhere, moderate to fresh southeast winds. Moderate to rough seas.
Occasional rain and few thunderstorms over most places. Rain becoming
frequent and heavy in the afternoon.

For Navua / Suva / Nausori :
Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Tuesday    : Occasional rain and few thunderstorms. Rain
becoming frequent and heavy in the afternoon. 

For Sigatoka / Coral coast: 
Occasional rain over the Coral Coast. Fine apart from isolated
afternoon showers about Sigatoka. Isolated heavy falls likely. 
Outlook for Tuesday : Occasional rain and few thunderstorms. Rain
becoming frequent and heavy in the afternoon.

For Nadi / Lautoka / Ba :
Fine apart from isolated afternoon or evening showers. Isolated
afternoon thunderstorms and heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Tuesday    : Occasional rain and few thunderstorms. Rain
becoming frequent and heavy in the afternoon.

For Tavua / Rakiraki :
Fine apart from afternoon or evening showers. Isolated afternoon
thunderstorms and heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Tuesday : Occasional rain and few thunderstorms. Rain
becoming frequent and heavy in the afternoon.

For Labasa :
Fine apart from afternoon or evening showers and thunderstorms.
Outlook for Tuesday    : Occasional rain and few thunderstorms. Rain
becoming frequent and heavy in the afternoon.

For Savusavu : Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Tuesday    : Occasional rain and few thunderstorms. Rain
becoming frequent and heavy in the afternoon.

For Lau / Lomaiviti group: 
Expect southeasterly winds with average speed of 45km/hr. 
Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Tuesday :  Occasional rain and few thunderstorms. Rain
becoming frequent and heavy in the afternoon. Strong winds
continuing.

For Kadavu:
Expect southeasterly winds with average speed of 45km/hr. 
Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Tuesday :  Occasional rain and few thunderstorms. Rain
becoming frequent and heavy in the afternoon. Strong winds
continuing. 

For Rotuma :
Situation: A trough of low pressure with associated cloud and showers
affects the island.

Occasional showers and isolated thunderstorms.
Moderate to fresh northeasterly winds. 
Moderate to rough seas.
Outlook for Tuesday    : Some showers and possible isolated
thunderstorms.