FXUS66 KLOX 220049
AFDLOX

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Los Angeles/Oxnard CA 
549 PM PDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...21/229 PM.

A low pressure system passing through eastern California over the
weekend will bring significant cooling, with a chance of light 
rain or drizzle. Gusty winds onshore winds expected on Saturday, 
especially over the interior. Offshore winds to follow later 
Sunday and Monday with a slight warm up. Additional warming on tap
for the middle of the week, with a possible return of offshore
flow by Thursday or Friday.

&&

.SHORT TERM (TDY-MON)...21/229 PM.

A rather large low pressure system, currently working into
Washington State, will drop into and through eastern California
over the weekend. This will do a number of things to our weather,
all of which will add up to much different looking conditions on
Saturday, which conjure up nostalgic feelings of fall. The current
low clouds and fog sitting off the coast will push deep inland
tonight, and well into the lower mountain slopes by Saturday.
Clearing will be slow or non-existent. Along the way, the marine 
layer should nearly triple in depth, which usually means a good 
chance for drizzle or even light rain, which would happen Saturday
or Saturday Night. Chances for accumulating precipitation are 
highest in the LA County foothills, where totals could approach 
0.25 inches. Otherwise, any accumulations will be very light and 
under 0.10 inches. While precipitation is far from certain, the 
majority of the ensemble projections spit out at least something, 
especially over LA County. Temperatures to no surprise will be 
down, with highs in the 60s to around 70 most common, which is a 
far cry from earlier this week. Lastly, onshore winds will be on
the rise, but breezier than normal conditions everywhere, and
downright windy conditions over the Antelope Valley and nearby
hills. 

As the low moves to the east, surface high pressure inducing cold
air behind it will generate gusty north winds on Sunday, then
northeast winds by Monday. This should clear things out and bring
some warming, especially over coastal areas. Sundowner winds will
kick things off Saturday Night, with gusts of 30 to 40 mph likely.
On Sunday north gusts of 25 to 35 mph will be common over the
favored mountain areas. By Monday, moderate Santa Ana winds are 
likely, with gusts of 30 to 45 mph expected, likely reaching the 
coastal areas for a few hours. This is not a hot Santa Ana by any 
stretch, but highs should generally get into the 70s to around 80.

.LONG TERM (TUE-FRI)...21/228 PM.

Tuesday and Wednesday look modestly warm, with highs in the mid
70s to mid 80s common, with generally onshore flow. Wednesday 
could be extra breezy and a majority of the ensemble projections
show another low pressure system moving through Nevada. This could
set up another offshore wind event for Thursday or Friday, but the
EPS and GEFS ensemble systems still have a fair amount of spread
in terms of timing, strength, and presence of the winds. More than
likely we will have more offshore flow as that fits the most
common projected pattern, but the strength and timing is still to
be determined.

&&

.AVIATION...22/0044Z.

At 0000Z at KLAX, the marine layer was 1200 feet deep. The top of
the inversion was near 2500 feet with a temperature of 22  deg C.

Moderate confidence in the 00Z TAFs. Low clouds and IFR/MVFR 
conds are expected to move over all the coastal and valley sites 
early this evening, then persisting into the afternoon hours on 
Saturday. The timing of the onset of the low clouds may be off 
+/- 1 to 2 hours. Cigs are expected to remain BKN/OVC well into 
the afternoon and possibly through the period. Some sites could 
see cigs rising above MVFR category. 

KWJF and KPMD are expected to see VFR conditions through Saturday 
morning. Increasing gusty SW winds could cause reductions in
visibility due to blowing sand and dust Saturday afternoon. 

KLAX...Moderate confidence in the 00Z TAF. Low clouds and IFR 
conds should affect the site until 08Z, then improve to MVFR 
thru the remainder of the fcst period. There is a chance that MVFR
conditions could begin as early as 03Z-05Z. There is a 30 percent
chance that BKN-OVC cigs will rise above MVFR level after 21Z. 

KBUR...Moderate confidence in the 00Z TAF. Mostly VFR conds can 
be expected through 08Z-10Z tonight. Low clouds and MVFR conds 
should then affect site through 21Z, with cigs possibly lifting 
above MVFR level after 21Z.

&&

.MARINE...21/110 PM.

For the Outer Waters, moderate to high confidence in current
forecast. Winds and seas should remain below Small Craft Advisory
(SCA) levels through tonight. SCA conds are expected to spread 
north to south across the outer waters Saturday morning, then 
continue thru Sunday night. There is a 40% chance SCA conds will 
continue at times Monday thru Wednesday. There is also a 30-40% 
chance of gale force gusts Saturday night into Sunday for the 
waters NW of Santa Cruz Island. 

For the Inner Waters north of Point Sal, moderate to high
confidence in current forecast. Through Saturday morning, conds
are expected to remain below SCA levels. SCA conds are likely at
times Saturday afternoon thru Sunday evening. While winds should 
drop below SCA levels during the late night and morning hours, 
seas will likely remain at SCA levels. Conds will likely be below
SCA levels late Sunday night through Monday night. For Tuesday 
and Wednesday, there is a 30-40% chance of SCA level winds in the 
afternoon and evening hours. 

For the Inner Waters south of Point Conception, moderate to high
confidence in current forecast. Tonight through Saturday morning,
high confidence in winds and seas remaining below SCA levels. For
late Saturday afternoon thru Sunday night, SCA conds are likely 
at times across the western SBA Channel and western portions of 
the southern inner waters, especially from late afternoon thru 
late evening. Conds should remain below SCA levels later Sunday 
night through Tuesday, except for a 30% chance of gusty NE winds 
to near SCA levels Monday morning south of Point Mugu. There is 
then a 30%-40% chance western areas could have SCA conds afternoon
and evening hours for Wednesday.

&&

.LOX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CA...Wind Advisory in effect from 11 AM Saturday to 3 AM PDT
      Sunday for zones 54-59. (See LAXNPWLOX).
PZ...Small Craft Advisory in effect from 6 AM to 6 PM PDT Saturday
      for zones 670-673. (See LAXMWWLOX).
     Gale Watch in effect from Saturday evening through Sunday
      afternoon for zone 670. (See LAXMWWLOX).
     Gale Watch in effect from Saturday evening through late
      Saturday night for zone 673. (See LAXMWWLOX).

&&

$$

PUBLIC...Kittell
AVIATION...Smith
MARINE...Sirard
SYNOPSIS...RK

weather.gov/losangeles

Experimental Graphical Hazardous Weather Outlook at:
https://www.weather.gov/erh/ghwo?wfo=lox
