FXUS66 KMTR 220110
AFDMTR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service San Francisco Bay Area
610 PM PDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...A deepening marine layer through today will precede a
fairly quick moving cold front arriving from the northwest tonight
and early Saturday morning. This front may bring light drizzle or
a very light rain to the coastal hills and mountains tonight. The
front will also bring an increase in wind especially over the
coastal waters, but with land overlap as well across coastal
Sonoma County and Marin County tonight. Breezy to gusty west to
northwest winds Saturday across the Bay Area and north Central
Coast. Much chillier through the weekend and early next week 
especially regarding night-time and morning temperatures. Another
cold frontal passage is forecast Tuesday next week.

&&

...Gusty Winds This Weekend...

.DISCUSSION...as of 1:49 PM PDT Friday...24 hour trends show
cooling, in some cases strong (double digit) cooling, continuing
early this afternoon. A stationary and weak surface trough is 
located within the marine layer along the immediate coast of the 
Bay Area. The back edge of clearing over the outer coastal waters
has only advanced southeastward 20 miles to 30 miles since daybreak.
Much more moist air, with precipitable water values ~ 1.1" (between
the 90th percentile and max moving average for the time of year when
it reaches Oakland early Saturday) and relatively milder air along
and ahead of the cold front to our northwest will gradually merge
with marine layer stratus currently along our coast. Even in the 
near term it's very difficult to say how the merging will take 
place i.e. if the wedge of drying seen on satellite will or won't 
erode any of the stratus. Otherwise the marine layer has deepened 
to 2,100 feet at Bodega Bay and has temporarily decreased to 1,400
feet at Fort Ord. Overall the marine layer should continue to 
deepen, rapidly deepening this evening and overnight as cold air 
advection strengthens over our cwa. Sufficient cooling will fully 
erode the marine layer temperature inversion early Saturday 
morning. 

North to northwest winds will increase through tonight mainly at 
the immediate coast and especially over the coastal waters. Winds 
will likely stay below advisory criteria over land; it'll be 
breezy to gusty with northwest wind gusts to 30 to 40 mph in the 
hills/mtns, with light winds in the valleys. Assuming coastal 
stratus holds together through peak diurnal surface warming and 
mixing this afternoon and merges with the incoming moist air to 
our northwest then light drizzle will probably develop at the 
coast tonight. The NBM is dry, adjusted grids for patchy light 
drizzle at the coast late tonight and early Saturday morning per 
WRF-ARW, GFS and ECMWF output.

Otherwise periodic breezy to gusty northwest winds tonight and
Saturday, as mentioned mainly at elevation along the coast and 
over the coastal waters. Similarly breezy to gusty winds over the 
weekend with a focus again Saturday during the day (more widespread
winds), and again Sunday night into early Monday. Based on fuels,
winds, humidities current thinking is a fire weather watch is not
needed for the weekend. A long wave trough sets up over the west 
this weekend through next week, expect cooler temperatures 
especially at night and during the morning, coldest over the 
inland valleys.

&&

.AVIATION...As of 06:05 PM Friday...For the 00Z TAFs. High clouds
are currently making their way into the Bay Area ahead of a cold 
front that currently resides over CA/OR border and is moving 
southward. Frontal passage is expected around 12z for the North 
Bay and by 16z will be out of our area and moving towards SoCal. 
The FROPA timing has made for a tricky cig forecast. KMRY and 
KSNS already under MVFR-IFR cigs. After 08z, terminals south of 
the North Bay will likely see MVFR-IFR cigs. There is a slight 
chance that KSFO/KOAK could see a brief intrusion of stratus 
around 03-04z today, but confidence is low as dry air is 
anticipated to move through around that time as well. Will 
continue to monitor closely.

Winds are currently onshore with NW winds around 8 to 15 knots.
Potential for LLWS for North Bay terminals overnight with winds 
around 35 knots possible at 1000 feet AGL. Winds anticipated to 
turn slightly south (WSW) around 03-07z but will veer back to the
W/NW after 08z. By Saturday early afternoon, NW winds expected to
increase and our area will be fairly breezy with gusts up to 
20-25 knots possible at most terminals. Locally breezier 
conditions for coastal terminals such as KSFO, which could gust up
to 35 knots. Once cold front fully passes in the late morning 
Saturday, clear skies will prevail. 

Vicinity of SFO...VFR currently with increasing high clouds 
around 15000 to 20000 feet. Highest chance for cig development is 
after 08z tonight with borderline MVFR-IFR cigs. There is a slight
chance that KSFO/KOAK could see a brief intrusion of stratus 
around 03-04z today, but confidence is low as dry air is 
anticipated to move through around that time as well. Northwest winds
will increase beginning tonight. Strong gusts will start tomorrow
after 16z with peak gusts (up to 35 knots) occurring around 21z. 

KSFO Bridge Approach...Similar to SFO.

Monterey Bay...MVFR-IFR cigs currently with IFR cigs likely to 
persist through the night into the morning. Light drizzle is also
likely later tonight into the early morning as cold front 
approaches. Expect gusty winds beginning late morning Saturday, at
both KSNS and KMRY, with KSNS possibly having higher winds near 
25 knots due to the valley influence. 

&&

.MARINE...as of 02:58 PM PDT Friday...Strong northwest winds will
continue to spread south and continue to increase ahead of an 
incoming cold front. Strongest winds will occur Saturday afternoon
in the post- frontal environment and will last through Sunday 
afternoon where gale force conditions will occur across a majority
of the waters. Gale-force winds will result in dangerous seas and
as such, inexperienced mariners should not be on the waters this 
weekend. As a result of strong, persistent winds, sea state will 
become hazardous with wind wave heights up to 15 feet possible. In
addition, a northwest swell of 11 to 12 seconds persists in the 
background.

&&

.MTR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
     .Tday...SCA...SF Bay
             SCA...Mry Bay
             SCA...Pt Arena to Pt Reyes 0-10 nm until 3 AM
             SCA...Pt Arena to Pigeon Pt 10-60 nm until 3 AM
             GLW...Pt Arena to Pt Reyes 0-10 nm
             GLW...Pt Reyes to Pigeon Pt 0-10 nm
             GLW...Pigeon Pt to Pt Pinos 0-10 nm
             GLW...Pt Pinos to Pt Piedras Blancas 0-10 nm
             SCA...Pt Reyes to Pigeon Pt 0-10 nm until 3 AM
             SCA...Pigeon Pt to Pt Piedras Blancas 10-60 nm until 3 AM
             GLW...Pt Arena to Pigeon Pt 10-60 nm
             GLW...Pigeon Pt to Pt Piedras Blancas 10-60 nm

&&

$$

PUBLIC FORECAST: Canepa
AVIATION: McCorkle
MARINE: McCorkle

Visit us at www.weather.gov/sanfrancisco

Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube at:
www.facebook.com/nwsbayarea
www.twitter.com/nwsbayarea
www.youtube.com/nwsbayarea
