FXUS63 KLBF 231912
AFDLBF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service North Platte NE
212 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Updated short term discussion...

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday night)
Issued at 210 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Surface heating ahead of the cold front was quite robust this morning 
and temperatures have responded accordingly with readings soaring into 
the lower 80s. This has also lead to very deep mixing in the
boundary layer with steep low level lapse rates, allowing high 
momentum air aloft to translate to the surface. Winds at Imperial
and other locations south have been gusting over 50 mph and gusts
of 40 to 45 mph are becoming common as the low level jet ahead of
the front surges north toward eastern Nebraska. satellite imagery
is able to detect some blowing dust from south central Nebraska 
through western KS and eastern CO. So far surface observations 
have generally been in the 3 to 5 mile range with an occasional 
dip to around 2 miles. Most of this dust will be aloft but will be
watching locations generally south of highways 2/91 and from the 
highway 83 corridor eastward for possible impacts from the blowing
dust.

As of early this afternoon, the cold front is through the panhandle and 
most of the sandhills. It should clear the highway 83 corridor around 
4PM, then move off to our east and clear highway 183 by 8PM. The strong 
southwesterly winds and blowing dust will continue until the front 
passes. Winds will then become northwest behind the front with gusts of 
30 to 40 mph continuing through tonight into Monday. Gusts from the 
Pine Ridge down through the sandhills may be more in the 40 to 45 mph 
range.

Trends in guidance have been to a drier solution with the front so 
while some scattered showers are possible north of Interstate 80 and 
west of highway 83 this evening through early tonight, amounts will be 
a trace to a hundreth or two. And with much colder air moving in behind 
the front some wet snow will mix in but no accumulation is expected. 
Strong low pressure will keep some moisture across northern Nebraska 
with some widely scattered rain/snow showers up around highway 20 but 
again may precipitation will be quite light. Any lingering 
precipitation tapers off late tomorrow as winds diminish with dry 
conditions expected through Monday night.

Low temperatures tonight will range from the middle 20s across 
northwest Nebraska to the middle 30s further to the southeast. High 
temperatures Monday will only range form the middle 40s northwest 
Nebraska to the middle 50s south of Interstate 80, followed by lows in 
the 20s Monday night.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Saturday)
Issued at 408 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Beyond Monday...a return to drier more autumn-like temperatures 
return to the region. High temperatures drop back into the low 50s 
to low 60s which is near or slightly below normal with lows in the 
mid 20s to mid 30s through Wednesday night. 

The next shot at any moisture and possibly precipitation will be on 
Thursday as a trough digs across the central US. At this time any 
precipitation appears to be light and should remain all liquid as 
boundary layer temperatures remain above freezing. While all of 
north central Nebraska could see some light rain, the best chance 
for any rainfall will generally be north of Highway 2. 

High pressure and upper level ridging returns for the end of the 
week and into the weekend. Dry weather will accompany the return of 
high pressure with temperatures remain in the upper 50s to mid 60s 
for highs and lows dropping into the low to mid 30s. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1232 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The short term aviation concern is strong wind gusts across 
western and north central Nebraska. As of early this afternoon,
southwesterly winds gusting from 35 to 40 kts have been observed 
across the area. These strong winds will persist through the 
evening with gusts subsiding some after sunset. An additional
concern will focus on the potential for blowing dust across
southwest and central NE, possibly affecting KIML and KLBF 
however, confidence in this impacting KLBF was too low to include 
at this time. 

Additionally, a strong cold front will track across the area this
evening shifting winds towards the northwest with gusts of 25 to 
30 kts expected through the overnight period. A few rain showers
are possible for northern Nebraska this evening with ceilings
beginning to drop after sunset. Potential exists for MVFR CIGS 
developing across northern NE, including KVTN terminal. Did 
include a mention of MVFR cigs in the TAF, however, precise timing
remains uncertain and refinements to later forecasts is likely.


&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 408 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A critical fire weather pattern is underway across much of 
western and north central Nebraska. The exception is in the 
panhandle, where cool air will settle in rather quickly today.
Conditions start off with very poor humidity recovery early this
morning, generally in the 50 to 60% range (west) and 60 to 80%
(central). Temperatures rise into the 80s once again and 
south/southwest winds increase steadily ahead of an advancing 
strong cold front. Minimum humidity values this afternoon ahead of
the front will be borderline critical (15 to 20% southwest, 
around 20% central), but wind speeds will be more than enough to 
support erratic fire behavior. Gusts exceeding 40 mph are likely 
before the front, and northwest winds gusting 30 mph are expected 
behind the front. Passage is expected early afternoon (far 
northwest), late afternoon (Hwy 83 corridor), and mid evening 
(north central). Scattered rain showers will develop in the wake
of the front, mostly in the western and northern Sandhills. Any
remaining activity tonight near the Pine Ridge will transition to
snow. The lightning risk with rain is minimal, and the potential 
for accumulating snow is low. 

Blustery northwest winds are expected Monday was gusts exceed 30
mph. Humidity will not be an issue as temperatures struggle to
leave the 40s (north) and 50s (south). Elevated fire weather
conditions return Tuesday for far southwest Nebraska (zones 210,
219) due to low humidity, and Wednesday mainly for wind. The next
chance of precipitation comes Thursday with another cool front.

&&

.LBF WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Red Flag Warning until 7 PM CDT this evening for NEZ206-208>210-
219.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...MBS
LONG TERM...Kulik
AVIATION...Viken
FIRE WEATHER...Snively
