FXUS63 KLBF 231936
AFDLBF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service North Platte NE
236 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Updated fire weather...

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday night)
Issued at 210 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Surface heating ahead of the cold front was quite robust this morning 
and temperatures have responded accordingly with readings soaring into 
the lower 80s. This has also lead to very deep mixing in the
boundary layer with steep low level lapse rates, allowing high 
momentum air aloft to translate to the surface. Winds at Imperial
and other locations south have been gusting over 50 mph and gusts
of 40 to 45 mph are becoming common as the low level jet ahead of
the front surges north toward eastern Nebraska. satellite imagery
is able to detect some blowing dust from south central Nebraska 
through western KS and eastern CO. So far surface observations 
have generally been in the 3 to 5 mile range with an occasional 
dip to around 2 miles. Most of this dust will be aloft but will be
watching locations generally south of highways 2/91 and from the 
highway 83 corridor eastward for possible impacts from the blowing
dust.

As of early this afternoon, the cold front is through the panhandle and 
most of the sandhills. It should clear the highway 83 corridor around 
4PM, then move off to our east and clear highway 183 by 8PM. The strong 
southwesterly winds and blowing dust will continue until the front 
passes. Winds will then become northwest behind the front with gusts of 
30 to 40 mph continuing through tonight into Monday. Gusts from the 
Pine Ridge down through the sandhills may be more in the 40 to 45 mph 
range.

Trends in guidance have been to a drier solution with the front so 
while some scattered showers are possible north of Interstate 80 and 
west of highway 83 this evening through early tonight, amounts will be 
a trace to a hundreth or two. And with much colder air moving 
in behind the front some wet snow will mix in but no accumulation 
is expected. A rumble of thunder may also accompany any showers 
as mid/upper level lapse rates are steep, but any significant 
convection will reside off to our east where deeper moisture and 
surface instability are present. Strong low pressure will keep 
some moisture across northern Nebraska with some widely scattered 
rain/snow showers up around highway 20 but again may precipitation
will be quite light. Any lingering precipitation tapers off late 
tomorrow as winds diminish with dry conditions expected through 
Monday night.

Low temperatures tonight will range from the middle 20s across 
northwest Nebraska to the middle 30s further to the southeast. High 
temperatures Monday will only range form the middle 40s northwest 
Nebraska to the middle 50s south of Interstate 80, followed by lows in 
the 20s Monday night.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Saturday)
Issued at 408 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Beyond Monday...a return to drier more autumn-like temperatures 
return to the region. High temperatures drop back into the low 50s 
to low 60s which is near or slightly below normal with lows in the 
mid 20s to mid 30s through Wednesday night. 

The next shot at any moisture and possibly precipitation will be on 
Thursday as a trough digs across the central US. At this time any 
precipitation appears to be light and should remain all liquid as 
boundary layer temperatures remain above freezing. While all of 
north central Nebraska could see some light rain, the best chance 
for any rainfall will generally be north of Highway 2. 

High pressure and upper level ridging returns for the end of the 
week and into the weekend. Dry weather will accompany the return of 
high pressure with temperatures remain in the upper 50s to mid 60s 
for highs and lows dropping into the low to mid 30s. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1232 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The short term aviation concern is strong wind gusts across 
western and north central Nebraska. As of early this afternoon,
southwesterly winds gusting from 35 to 40 kts have been observed 
across the area. These strong winds will persist through the 
evening with gusts subsiding some after sunset. An additional
concern will focus on the potential for blowing dust across
southwest and central NE, possibly affecting KIML and KLBF 
however, confidence in this impacting KLBF was too low to include 
at this time. 

Additionally, a strong cold front will track across the area this
evening shifting winds towards the northwest with gusts of 25 to 
30 kts expected through the overnight period. A few rain showers
are possible for northern Nebraska this evening with ceilings
beginning to drop after sunset. Potential exists for MVFR CIGS 
developing across northern NE, including KVTN terminal. Did 
include a mention of MVFR cigs in the TAF, however, precise timing
remains uncertain and refinements to later forecasts is likely.


&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 235 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Critical to extreme fire weather conditions will exist across fire
zones except 204 until the approaching cold front moves through.

Ahead of the front, temperatures have soared into the low/mid 80s
and humidity has plummeted with readings ranging from near 10 
percent south of Interstate 80 to around 17 percent up around the
Niobrara valley. Coincident with the warm temperatures and low 
humidity is an axis of very strong southwesterly winds extending 
from around Imperial up through Ainsworth eastward with gusts of 
40 to 50 mph surging up ahead of the front. Frontal passage is
expected for the highway 83 corridor around 4PM, then highway 183
by 8PM, so there will be several more hours of critical to 
extreme fire weather conditions to contend with. 

Winds will then become northwest behind the front with gusts of 
30 to 40 mph continuing through tonight into Monday. Gusts from 
the Pine Ridge down through the sandhills may be more in the 40 to
45 mph range. However, temperatures will be notably cooler on
Monday with highs ranging form the middle 40s across northwest
Nebraska to the middle 50s south of Interstate 80 and minimum
humidity will also be higher with most locations well above 
30 percent. However some locations south of I-80 may see enhanced
to near critical conditions again tomorrow with the gusty
northwest winds if humidity trends down a bit. 

Trends in guidance have been to a drier solution behind the front
so while some scattered showers are possible north of Interstate 
80 and west of highway 83 this evening through early tonight, no
wetting precipitation is expected. A rumble of thunder may also 
accompany any showers as mid/upper level lapse rates are steep, 
but lightning activity with any storms in our area is expected to
be very low. Any significant convection will reside well off to 
our east where deeper moisture and surface instability are 
present. Any lingering precipitation tapers off late tomorrow as
winds diminish with dry conditions expected through Monday night.

Elevated fire weather conditions return Tuesday for far southwest
Nebraska (zones 210, 219) due to low humidity, and Wednesday 
mainly for wind. The next chance of precipitation arrives by 
Wednesday night with another cool front.

&&

.LBF WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Red Flag Warning until 7 PM CDT this evening for NEZ206-208>210-
219.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...MBS
LONG TERM...Kulik
AVIATION...Viken
FIRE WEATHER...MBS
