FXUS63 KGID 231733
AFDGID

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Hastings NE
1233 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...AVIATION UPDATE...

.DISCUSSION...(Today through Saturday)
Issued at 340 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Forecast Messages:

*Today's Fire Weather:
A Red Flag Warning is in effect for the entire forecast area. 
There is very high confidence of strong wind gusts up to 50 mph 
(possibly isolated instances of 55 mph) today, as well as RH 
values falling to 15-25 percent across most of the area. Across 
our far eastern zones RH may be a little higher (down to 30 
percent or so), but with the antecedent drought conditions, we 
feel very confident in this Red Flag Warning. The warning is in 
effect from noon to 8PM this evening, and extending this a little 
later is not out of the question if strong winds linger any longer
than forecast.

*Today's Severe Weather Potential:
We will continue to watch where the dry line sets up today.
Currently it is expected to set up east of our area, but there is
some model guidance that continues to set it up over our eastern
zones. If it sets up over our eastern counties there will be a
chance for thunderstorms that could easily become strong to
severe. The main threat with any storms would be strong winds, and
with the already strong winds it would not take much to see
thunderstorm winds to 70 mph or perhaps greater. We will also be
seeing decent shear and helicity so cannot rule out an isolated
tornado, but with limited instability and conditions becoming less
favorable for this after dark this threat continues to look
minimal. As it stands, our forecast area only has a limited chance
for thunderstorms at all, and just our far eastern and
southeastern counties at that.

*Much cooler temperatures Monday through the rest of the week:
After much above normal temperatures Sunday, high temperatures
Monday will only be in the 50s, and only into the 60s Tuesday and
Wednesday. Highs will be back in the 50s through the remainder of
the work week, and probably back into the 60s next weekend.

*Next storm system possible Thursday into Friday:
The next weather system will move across the Plains Thursday and
into Friday. There is model discrepancy mainly regarding the track
of this system, with the latest EC and Canadian model bringing
some precipitation to the area (but not very much)...whereas the
GFS leaves us dry. We'll call it a slight chance for now, even
with the bulk of the precipitation looking like it will remain
south at the moment. If we did see any precipitation from this,
most likely this would occur Thursday evening into early Friday 
morning.

*Climate (Near Record Highs Today):

Sunday Record Highs
Grand Island 88-1927
Hastings 90-1927
Forecast: Grand Island - 86, Hastings - 87



&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z KGRI/KEAR TAFS through 18Z Monday)
Issued at 1228 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions expected through the end of the period. Today's
main concern is the strong winds. Winds this afternoon will
continue to be out of the south and southwest at around 20-30 kts
with gusts to around 40 kts possible. Winds will remain elevated
through the evening and will come down slightly to around 15-20
kts with gusts to around 30 kts after midnight. Winds will
continue to decrease after midnight and towards morning. Expect
steady northwesterly winds tomorrow. 

Skies will remain clear to mostly clear through the evening then
cloud cover will slowly begin to increase overnight to broken
around morning tomorrow. These are expected to be mainly mid and
high level clouds. 

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 340 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

TODAY:
Critical fire weather conditions will occur across the entire
forecast area today due to strong winds and low RH. High temperatures
will climb into the 80s and winds will be out of the south to
southwest...sustained at 25 to 35 mph with gusts up to 50 mph. RH 
values will fall to 15 to 25 percent this afternoon, and with the 
very high confidence of strong winds and low RH in the middle of an 
ongoing drought the Red Flag Warning is a sure thing across the area 
this afternoon and evening.

Additionally, there is a slight chance of thunderstorms east of
Highway 281 this afternoon and evening and if any do occur, strong
thunderstorm winds would also be a concern. Confidence in this
occurring is fairly low, however.

MONDAY:
Temperatures will be much cooler Monday with highs mainly in the 50s.
Even though conditions are still expected to be relatively dry, RH
values should remain at or above 30 percent across most areas. Winds
will be out of the northwest and gust to 20 to 30 mph, mainly from
mid- morning through the afternoon. With the cooler temperatures and
higher RH, fire weather should not be as much of a concern
Monday...although any fire that gets going would still be problematic
with gusty winds and dry fuels. 

&&

.GID WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NE...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM CDT this evening for NEZ039>041-
     046>049-060>064-072>077-082>087.

KS...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM CDT this evening for KSZ005>007-
     017>019.

&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Hickford
AVIATION...Shawkey
FIRE WEATHER...Hickford
