FXUS63 KLBF 231758
AFDLBF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service North Platte NE
1258 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...UPDATED AVIATION FORECAST DISCUSSION...

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Monday)
Issued at 408 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Active weather returns for the short term as an upper level trough 
digs south across the southwest US and a surface low will develop 
off the Front Ranges of the Rockies this afternoon. Any 
precipitation with this system will start off across the northwest 
this afternoon and slowly push southeast through tonight before 
pushing out of the region by Monday afternoon. Precipitation will 
likely start as all rain as boundary layer temperatures remain well 
above freezing. As cooler air pushes in behind the front and low 
pressure on Sunday night, there is a potential for precipitation to 
change over to a rain snow mix and even briefly all snow across the 
Pine Ridge region. Any accumulations that were in the previous 
forecast were removed during this issuance as drier trends continue 
with the latest model runs. Locations east of a Imperial to Thedford 
to Valentine line are not anticipated to see any precipitation as 
the system moves northeast and drier air pushes in behind the front. 

In addition to precipitation across the region, very strong winds 
are expected with this system as the low moves over Nebraska and 
deepens on Monday. Northwest wind gusts up to 40 to 45 mph with 
isolated 50 mph gusts are expected mainly this afternoon, but may 
even persist into Monday. Winds and wind gusts continue to be raised 
well over guidance (raised to at least the 90th percentile). While 
not quite reaching high wind criteria, those with outdoor furniture 
or loose items should make sure to secure them before the strongest 
wind gusts hit this afternoon. 

.LONG TERM...(Monday night through Saturday)
Issued at 408 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Beyond Monday...a return to drier more autumn-like temperatures 
return to the region. High temperatures drop back into the low 50s 
to low 60s which is near or slightly below normal with lows in the 
mid 20s to mid 30s through Wednesday night. 

The next shot at any moisture and possibly precipitation will be on 
Thursday as a trough digs across the central US. At this time any 
precipitation appears to be light and should remain all liquid as 
boundary layer temperatures remain above freezing. While all of 
north central Nebraska could see some light rain, the best chance 
for any rainfall will generally be north of Highway 2. 

High pressure and upper level ridging returns for the end of the 
week and into the weekend. Dry weather will accompany the return of 
high pressure with temperatures remain in the upper 50s to mid 60s 
for highs and lows dropping into the low to mid 30s. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1232 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The short term aviation concern is strong wind gusts across 
western and north central Nebraska. As of early this afternoon,
southwesterly winds gusting from 35 to 40 kts have been observed 
across the area. These strong winds will persist through the 
evening with gusts subsiding some after sunset. An additional
concern will focus on the potential for blowing dust across
southwest and central NE, possibly affecting KIML and KLBF 
however, confidence in this impacting KLBF was too low to include 
at this time. 

Additionally, a strong cold front will track across the area this
evening shifting winds towards the northwest with gusts of 25 to 
30 kts expected through the overnight period. A few rain showers
are possible for northern Nebraska this evening with ceilings
beginning to drop after sunset. Potential exists for MVFR CIGS 
developing across northern NE, including KVTN terminal. Did 
include a mention of MVFR cigs in the TAF, however, precise timing
remains uncertain and refinements to later forecasts is likely.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 408 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A critical fire weather pattern is underway across much of 
western and north central Nebraska. The exception is in the 
panhandle, where cool air will settle in rather quickly today.
Conditions start off with very poor humidity recovery early this
morning, generally in the 50 to 60% range (west) and 60 to 80%
(central). Temperatures rise into the 80s once again and 
south/southwest winds increase steadily ahead of an advancing 
strong cold front. Minimum humidity values this afternoon ahead of
the front will be borderline critical (15 to 20% southwest, 
around 20% central), but wind speeds will be more than enough to 
support erratic fire behavior. Gusts exceeding 40 mph are likely 
before the front, and northwest winds gusting 30 mph are expected 
behind the front. Passage is expected early afternoon (far 
northwest), late afternoon (Hwy 83 corridor), and mid evening 
(north central). Scattered rain showers will develop in the wake
of the front, mostly in the western and northern Sandhills. Any
remaining activity tonight near the Pine Ridge will transition to
snow. The lightning risk with rain is minimal, and the potential 
for accumulating snow is low. 

Blustery northwest winds are expected Monday was gusts exceed 30
mph. Humidity will not be an issue as temperatures struggle to
leave the 40s (north) and 50s (south). Elevated fire weather
conditions return Tuesday for far southwest Nebraska (zones 210,
219) due to low humidity, and Wednesday mainly for wind. The next
chance of precipitation comes Thursday with another cool front.

&&

.LBF WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Red Flag Warning until 7 PM CDT this evening for NEZ206-208>210-
219.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...Kulik
LONG TERM...Kulik
AVIATION...Viken
FIRE WEATHER...Snively
