FXUS62 KILM 231930
AFDILM

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Wilmington NC
330 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Low pressure offshore from the Carolina coasts will lift northward
and away from the region early this week. High pressure will 
return through mid week before a weak cold front moves through 
Wednesday night. High pressure will then follow at least through
the end of the week with more unsettled weather possible later
in the weekend. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
Weak low pressure currently off the southern NC coast, supported by 
a mid and upper level low/trough, will lift northward this evening 
into tonight as a ridge builds between east coast trough and a deep 
trough moving across the western half of the US. Will see clearing 
of high clouds over SE NC this evening, but increased low level 
moisture associated with offshore system will keep NC counties a few 
degrees warmer than NE SC tonight. Nudged temps a bit more towards 
NAM MOS forecast tonight with good cooling across SC into the upper 
40s where GFS looks to be a bit too warm, while NC remains around 50 
degrees. Scattered clouds may linger across coastal NC counties 
tomorrow morning before skies clear by the afternoon. Ridging at 
the surface and aloft centered to the west tomorrow will maintain 
deep dry northerly flow, though without much CAA as northerly flow 
only extends to the Mid-Atlantic. High temps Monday near normal 
around 75 degrees.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY NIGHT/...
Forecast confidence is moderate to high this period with the
main uncertainty being rain chances with the cold frontal
passage mid week. Through Tuesday, the area will remain 
situated between inland high pressure and offshore low pressure 
at the surface while an upper trough/low lingers over/near the 
area. A weak cold front will approach Tuesday night and 
especially Wednesday before moving through Wednesday night. The 
lack of significant moisture will prevent much rainfall but certainly
can't rule out some light showers Wednesday into the first part
of Wednesday night ahead of the cold front as shortwave energy 
aloft moves through. Otherwise, temperatures will stay well 
above normal.

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
Forecast confidence is moderate through Friday night, then low to 
moderate thereafter. High pressure is expected to build from 
the north late week and likely continue over the weekend. 
Meanwhile, a coastal trough could develop and bring some mainly 
coastal showers but there is more uncertainty regarding better 
rain chances/amounts later in the weekend as much depends on the
proximity of a trough to the west. Latest guidance suggest a 
drier forecast so we'll keep rain chances pretty low for now. 
Temperatures should stay above normal but could fall back closer
to normal late in the week, especially highs.

&&

.AVIATION /19Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
VFR to dominate this period. Mostly clear skies with just a few
passing cirrus clouds for majority of the area, with high clouds
clearing out later today. Exception is coastal SE NC, where high
clouds will be more abundant for the rest of today, and may see
a few mid clouds overnight. Low clouds around 2500 ft may move
in from the north around exiting system moving up the NC coast
and impact ILM tomorrow morning, but at this time expect more
scattered nature vs ceilings. No fog forecasted overnight, but
wouldn't be surprised to see patchy/brief MVFR visibilities at
times mainly across inland NE SC. Current gusty north winds will
quickly diminish over the next few of hours, with calm/light
winds overnight and remaining light out of the north tomorrow.

Extended Outlook...Forecast confidence is moderate to high this 
period. MVFR or perhaps IFR restrictions possible, mainly due to 
nighttime low clouds/light fog. 

&&

.MARINE...
Through Monday...Sub-SCA conditions expected through Monday with 
winds and seas continuing to improve as offshore low pressure moves 
off to the north tonight. 10-15 kt northerly winds tonight over the 
coastal waters will weaken to 10 kts or less by midday Monday. Seas 
will be gradually lowering throughout the near term as NE 8-9 sec 
swell weakens. 2-4 ft seas this evening lowers to 2-3 ft by morning, 
and further to around 2 ft late Monday.

Monday night through Friday: Forecast confidence this period is 
moderate to high.  No significant concerns as winds/seas are 
forecast to remain below Small Craft Advisory thresholds although 
should see a general worsening trend late in the period as the 
pressure gradient tightens, mainly from building high pressure 
inland. 

&&

.ILM WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SC...None.
NC...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...ILM
NEAR TERM...VAO
SHORT TERM...RJB
LONG TERM...RJB
AVIATION...RJB
MARINE...RJB
