FXUS62 KMHX 231939
AFDMHX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Newport/Morehead City NC
339 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Low pressure off the coast will weaken tonight into Monday, with high 
pressure building in from the west thereafter. A weak cold front will 
cross the area mid to late week. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
As of 3 PM Sun...Low pressure off the coast begins to weaken 
tonight as the upper low is absorbed into the upper level flow. 
Ample low level pressure remains in place, but waning lift will 
result in a downward trend across the Inner and Outer Banks 
through the evening and overnight hours, with largely dry 
conditions expected by the early morning hours. Further inland, 
clouds will gradually scatter out through the night, with 
mainly clear skies and cooler temps by sunrise. Temps remain 
mild along the coast with lows in the 60s, but cooler inland 
with lows near normal. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY/...
As of 3 PM Sun...Heights aloft continue to increase Monday with
coastal troughing and inland ridging at the surface. Strong
upper subsidence will keep mainly dry conditions in place, but
with ample low level moisture lingering along the coast mostly
cloud conditions, especially east of Hwy 17, and a few
light/brief coastal showers are possible. Much nicer weather
inland with mostly sunny skies across the inner Coastal Plain, 
where highs will reach into the mid 70s.

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY/... 
As of 3 PM Sunday...High pressure ridges in from the north to 
start the work week with a weak cold front pushing through 
midweek. 

Monday night and Tuesday...Broad mid-level troughing will 
lingers across the eastern seaboard, supported by a dissipating 
offshore frontal boundary, but we will be hard-pressed to find 
any robust forcing with sfc high pressure in place. A stray 
shower can't be ruled out along the immediate coast, but 
otherwise should expect a mostly dry forecast with warming 
temps. Highs Tuesday will be in the mid 70s across the FA with 
a few upper 70s south and west.

Wednesday through Sunday... A weakening low pressure system 
will lift north and east across the MS River Valley Wed into Thu
and drag along a weak cold front along with it across the 
eastern US. By the time it reaches our FA, it is expected to be 
fairly dry and washed out, resulting in a limited precip 
chances. Can't completely rule out a stray shower along the 
immediate coast Wed/Thu with a disorganized and weak coastal 
system drifting offshore, but the forecast is expected to be 
mostly dry during this time period. Weak WAA ahead of the 
approaching front Wed will help aftn temps reach the upper 70s 
before helping temps return to the mid 70s behind the front for 
Thu through Sat with high pressure building in from the north.

&&

.AVIATION /19Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
SHORT TERM /through Monday/... 
As of 2 PM Sun...Ample low level moisture advecting into the 
area from low pressure offshore is expected to keep sub-VFR 
conditions in place through tonight, with greatest confidence 
further east. Increasing upper subsidence from south of north 
early Monday morning could bring a brief period of IFR ceilings 
mainly to EWN within a couple of hours of dawn Monday, but 
confidence is too low to prevail IFR in the TAF for the time 
being. Low pressure shifts away from the coast slowly Monday, 
with decreasing moisture advection resulting in scattering out 
of clouds from W to E through the day, with VFR expected by the 
end of the TAF period.

LONG TERM /Monday night through Friday/... 
As of 2 PM Sunday...High pressure builds in from the NW Monday
night and Tuesday. A few more clouds along the coastal airspace
Monday given a weakening offshore front, but cloud coverage 
should be improving by Tuesday. Weak cold front washes out 
across the region Wed into Thu with little impacts expected to 
terminals.

&&

.MARINE...
SHORT TERM /Through Monday/... 
As of 320 PM Sun...Weakening low pressure off the coast will
result in a relaxing N to NW gradient tonight into Monday. SCAs
for the sounds come down this evening as winds become moderate,
while SCAs for the coastal waters mostly persist through the
night as diminishing NE windswell keeps seas 4-6 ft through
much of the night, especially near and north of Cape Hatteras.
Moderate NW winds prevail Monday as high pressure ridges in 
from the west, and seas continue to diminish to 3-5 ft. 

LONG TERM /Monday night through Friday/... 
As of 3 PM Sunday...Winds turn more NErly Tuesday and calm to 
around 10 kts with seas 2-4 ft. Weak cold front will approach 
the area Wed into Thu, turning winds more SWrly around 5-10 kts 
Wed aftn before turning back to the north behind the front Thu, 
coming out around 15 kts. Seas will remain relatively unchanged 
around 2-4 ft.

&&

.MHX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NC...Beach Hazards Statement until 8 PM EDT this evening for NCZ196-
     203>205.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 8 PM EDT this evening for AMZ131-
     230-231.
     Small Craft Advisory until 10 PM EDT this evening for AMZ135.
     Small Craft Advisory until 10 AM EDT Monday for AMZ150-152-154.
     Small Craft Advisory until 1 AM EDT Monday for AMZ156-158.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...MHX
NEAR TERM...CB
SHORT TERM...CB
LONG TERM...ML
AVIATION...CB/ML
MARINE...CB/ML
