FXUS62 KMHX 231812
AFDMHX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Newport/Morehead City NC
212 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Low pressure off the coast this morning will continue to move
north today, bringing unsettled weather to the area. Then, high
pressure builds in from the west tomorrow through mid week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 PM THIS EVENING/...
As of 2 PM Sun...Light to moderate rainfall continues across the
Inner and Outer Banks this afternoon, with the ridging/dry air
still winning out inland. No significant changes to the 
forecast early this afternoon. 

Previous Discussion...Low pressure offshore will slowly move 
north of the area today, leading to continuing unsettled 
conditions. Current thinking is that inland, on the fringes of 
the system, conditions will likely remain dry with some peaks of
sun in the afternoon as well, leading to highs reaching the low
70s. Farther north and east, clouds should hang on leading to 
cooler temps remaining in the 60s, with scattered showers 
possible, and along the coast, especially the Outer Banks, there
is the greatest confidence in a miserable day with windy and 
rainy conditions.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 PM THIS EVENING THROUGH 6 AM MONDAY/...
As of 725 AM Sun...As the low pulls farther away from the 
region tonight, precip chances will end for most of the forecast
area, though the threat of isolated showers will persist for a 
good portion of the night along the Outer Banks. Though the 
system will pull away, residual low level cloud cover may 
persist, and will keep temps mild overnight with most spots 
remaining in the 50s (low 60s along the coast).

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY THROUGH SATURDAY/...
As of 255 AM Sunday...High pressure ridges in from the north to 
start the work week with a weak cold front pushing through midweek. 

Monday and Tuesday...Broad mid-level troughing will lingers across 
the eastern seaboard, supported by a dissipating offshore frontal 
boundary, but we will be hard-pressed to find any robust forcing 
with sfc high pressure in place. A stray shower can't be ruled out 
along the immediate coast, but otherwise should expect a mostly dry 
forecast with warming temps. For Monday, expect upper 60s to around 
70 along the coast with better cloud coverage and mid 70s inland. 
Highs Tuesday will be in the mid 70s across the FA with a few upper 
70s south and west.

Wednesday through Saturday... A weakening low pressure system will 
lift north and east across the MS River Valley Wed into Thu and drag 
along a weak cold front along with it across the eastern US. By the 
time it reaches our FA, it is expected to be fairly dry and washed 
out, resulting in a limited precip chances. Can't completely rule 
out a stray shower along the immediate coast Wed/Thu with a 
disorganized and weak coastal system drifting offshore, but the 
forecast is expected to be mostly dry during this time period. Weak 
WAA ahead of the approaching front Wed will help aftn temps reach 
the upper 70s before helping temps return to the mid 70s behind the 
front for Thu through Sat with high pressure building in from the 
north.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
SHORT TERM /through Monday/... 
As of 2 PM Sun...Ample low level moisture advecting into the 
area from low pressure offshore is expected to keep sub-VFR 
conditions in place through tonight, with greatest confidence 
further east. Increasing upper subsidence from south of north 
early Monday morning could bring a brief period of IFR ceilings 
mainly to EWN within a couple of hours of dawn Monday, but 
confidence is too low to prevail IFR in the TAF for the time 
being. Low pressure shifts away from the coast slowly Monday, 
with decreasing moisture advection resulting in scattering out 
of clouds from W to E through the day, with VFR expected by the 
end of the TAF period.

LONG TERM /Monday night through Friday/... 
As of 2 PM Sunday...High pressure builds in from the NW Monday
night and Tuesday. A few more clouds along the coastal airspace
Monday given a weakening offshore front, but cloud coverage 
should be improving by Tuesday. Weak cold front washes out 
across the region Wed into Thu with little impacts expected to 
terminals.

&&

.MARINE...
SHORT TERM /Through Tonight/...
As of 725 AM Sun...Small craft conditions continue this morning
as an area of low pressure moves up the NC coast. Winds are
currently N at 15-25 kts with winds gusts to 30-35 kts, while 
seas have built to 5-10 ft. Strong winds will continue for the 
rest of the morning and then expect winds to subside slightly 
this afternoon and turn to the NNE as the low moves to the north
of the coastal waters. Tonight winds subside to 15-20 kts, and 
may even become 10-15 kts by sunrise tomorrow morning. Seas will
remain around 5-10 ft through early tonight, and then begin to 
subside overnight, becoming 4-6 ft by early tomorrow morning.

LONG TERM /Monday through Thursday/... 
As of 310 AM Sunday...Improving marine conditions Monday as 
high pressure builds in from the NW. Nrly winds will still be a 
bit breezy around 15-20 kts, but below SCA criteria. All seas 
relax to 3- 5 ft by the aftn, which would allow any remaining 
SCAs to be dropped. Winds turn more NErly Tuesday and calm to 
around 10 kts with seas 2-4 ft. Weak cold front will approach 
the area Wed into Thu, turning winds more SWrly around 5-10 kts 
Wed aftn before turning back to the north behind the front Thu, 
coming out around 15 kts. Seas will remain relatively unchanged 
around 2-4 ft.

&&

.MHX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NC...Beach Hazards Statement until 8 PM EDT this evening for NCZ196-
     203>205.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 8 PM EDT this evening for AMZ131-
     230-231.
     Small Craft Advisory until 10 PM EDT this evening for AMZ135.
     Small Craft Advisory until 10 AM EDT Monday for AMZ150.
     Small Craft Advisory until 5 PM EDT Monday for AMZ152-154.
     Small Craft Advisory until 4 AM EDT Monday for AMZ156-158.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...MHX
NEAR TERM...SGK/CB
SHORT TERM...SGK
LONG TERM...ML
AVIATION...CB/ML
MARINE...SGK/ML
