FXUS62 KRAH 231807
AFDRAH

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Raleigh NC
205 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A mid and upper-level low and accompanying surface wave will track 
toward the southern Mid Atlantic coast through Monday, while high 
pressure will otherwise extend across the interior Mid Atlantic and 
Appalachians through early Wednesday. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
As of 1045 AM Sunday...

A closed mid/upper-level low just off the srn NC coast this morning 
will become an open wave trough while lifting nwd across the srn Mid 
Atlantic coastal region through tonight, while a ridge will amplify 
across the Deep South. 

At the surface, a wavy frontal zone analyzed through at least three 
1011-1014 mb circulation centers stretching from about 300 miles 
east-southeast of CHS to a couple of others 70 miles northeast and 
60 miles southeast of HSE, respectively, will remain quasi-
stationary. Visible satellite data indicate the srn-most circulation 
center east of CHS is moving ene just to the south of buoy 41002, 
while the ones just offshore the NC Outer Banks are nearly 
stationary and are forecast to make little additional wwd progress 
through tonight. 1032 mb high pressure centered over the Northeast 
will otherwise continue to extend south across the interior Mid 
Atlantic and cntl through srn Appalachians. 

Moisture will gradually increase and deepen amid the nely/nnely flow 
between the ridge and the offshore frontal zone, as evidence by the 
marked increase in PW and mean mixing ratio of over 1" and 6 g/kg, 
respectively, from 00Z to 12Z/23 at WAL. As a result, an area of low 
stratus, which has reached RWI and GWW in the past hour, will 
continue to edge swwd across the nrn and cntl NC Coastal Plain 
today. It will also be in those areas where a slight chance of rain, 
with light amounts of just a few hundredths of an inch at most, and 
high temperatures in the lwr-mid 60s, are forecast. Temperatures 
will range through the lwr 70s, beneath considerable high clouds 
across the ne Piedmont, Sandhills, srn Coastal Plain, to lwr-mid 70s 
with mostly sunny conditions over the srn and wrn Piedmont.

Low temperatures will again follow that distribution of cloud cover, 
with generally lwr 50s where clouds are most pervasive, and which 
may lower into a fog layer by Mon morning, through the Coastal 
Plain, to lwr-mid 40s over the srn/wrn Piedmont. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY AND MONDAY NIGHT/...
As of 340 AM Sunday...

High pressure will persist across much of central NC on Mon, with 
thicknesses rising to around 1380m, about 10m higher than Sun, 
supporting highs above normal in the mid-upper 70s in the 
central/south and lower to mid-70s across the north. A mid-level 
ridge over the Tennessee Valley will shift into the Piedmont by 
early Tue, while the mid-level shear axis tied to the coastal system 
will linger over eastern NC/VA. The coastal surface trough and 
associated surface low (or lows) will pivot slightly to the west but 
remain situated along the NC/VA coasts. Subsidence from the high and 
building upper-ridge should keep skies mostly sunny. Clear skies and 
light winds will favor good radiational cooling Mon night, but with 
temperatures above seasonal norms in the upper 40s to low 50s 
(except middle 40s over the outlying areas of the Piedmont).

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
As of 205 PM Sunday...

As Monday's upper level feature fills, upper level ridging will 
briefly extend across the East Coast, allowing dry weather to 
continue. The upper level system that will develop across the 
southern Plains will move northeast Tuesday and Wednesday, but the 
bulk of the forcing will remain across the Ohio River Valley. While 
slight chance pops were inherited in the forecast, deterministic and 
ensemble models are quite anemic for any chance of rain, and after 
collaborating with neighbors, have decided to remove pops from the 
forecast.

Behind the Wednesday system, high pressure will dominate the eastern 
United States Thursday and Friday. The GEFS is the most aggressive 
bringing precipitation into North Carolina, far earlier than the 
EPS, GFS, or ECMWF. Will keep pops dry Friday night, then increase 
pops through the weekend. Considering the speed of the system, the 
chance for rain is likely to continue into early next weekend.

Temperatures should peak Tuesday and Wednesday before the cold front 
moves through, then slowly drop each of the next few days in a trend 
towards normal temperatures. There are some signs that cold-air 
damming could develop in advance of the approaching system, which 
may drop temperatures lower than the current forecast of mid 60s to 
mid 70s for Sunday.


&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 200 PM Sunday... 

Moisture in nnely low level flow has resulted in the wwd expansion 
of an area of MVFR stratus/stratocumulus to as far west as RWI. It 
remains unclear if this cloud layer will hold firm in coverage 
through most of the TAF period, while lifting to ~3000-3500 ft by 
18Z Mon, or if it instead clears out and yields to an IFR-LIFR one 
that would consequently develop there Mon morning. In either event, 
any VFR conditions there are expected to be short-lived. Elsewhere, 
at least scattered 2000-4000 ft stratocumulus are likely to 
develop/spread swwd across RDU and FAY this evening-early tonight, 
when an associated MVFR ceiling will be possible. Meanwhile, the 
presence of drier air over the wrn NC Piedmont should result in 
continued VFR conditions at INT/GSO. 

Outlook: The low-level moisture over the ern VA and NC today will 
linger and favor the redevelopment of areas of IFR-MVFR conditions 
each morning through Tue, especially at RWI, FAY, and RDU.  

&&

.RAH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Kren/MWS
NEAR TERM...MWS
SHORT TERM...Kren
LONG TERM...Green
AVIATION...MWS
