FXUS62 KILM 231731
AFDILM

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Wilmington NC
131 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Low pressure offshore from the Carolina coasts, will lift 
northward and away from the region through early next week.  
High pressure will return thru mid week before a weak cold 
frontal passage occurs Wed night. High pressure will follow 
for the remainder of the week. Temperatures for the next 5
days will run at or above normal.

&&

.UPDATE...
Lowered dewpoints a bit for all but eastern parts of SE NC as
very dry air is being mixed down. Updated aviation discussion 
below.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
Stayed with a mainly dry forecast this period. Closed mid-level
low off the NC- SC Coasts this morning will lift northward to 
the DELMARVA area by the end of this period. In turn, this will 
lift a sfc low offshore from the NC Coast this morning, 
northward along an offshore stationary N-S oriented front, to 
the Atl waters off the DELMARVA Coast also by the end of this 
period. Meanwhile, sfc ridging will extend along the spine of 
the PA-VA-NC-SC Appalachians. Mid and upper level clouds will 
persist today, more opaque across the NC CWA. Any threat for 
onshore movement of light rainshowers will exist across Pender 
and New Hanover counties this morning, and that may even be 
pushing it. RH time height series for models indicate dry 
conditions to overtake the mid and upper levels by the end of 
this period with subsidence aloft the common denominator. 
Improving skies this aftn and tonight although some low-level 
moisture remains but at this point will not go nuts with 
cloudiness tonight but instead continuing the drying trend. 
Depending on the opaqueness of the clouds today will determine 
the whether temps reach well into the 70s, ie. SC CWA, or hold 
around 70, ie. northeast portions of the NC CWA. Overall, 
tonights low should continue milder NE portions of the CWA.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY THROUGH TUESDAY NIGHT/...
A progressive, almost "transitional" weather pattern sets in
this period, with coastal low pressure finally moving off to 
the NNE. High pressure maintains control inland, with weak, 
subtle ridging aloft. Dry forecast persists here, with the 
airmass currently in place continuing to modify. Only a few 
cirrus clouds expected in between sunshine, and highs easily hit
the mid 70s Monday, and upper 70s Tuesday. Lows in the low-to-
mid 50s Monday night escalate to the mid-to-upper 50s Tuesday 
night.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH SATURDAY/...
Wednesday, an upper low over the Ohio River Valley weakens and
lifts northeastward. Some guidance kept this low further south 
in the last couple of days, but now seeing better agreement in 
this northerly trend. This pushes a weak cold front through the 
Carolinas, with only minor forcing expected Wednesday night as 
the front emerges offshore. Between the weak forcing and dry 
atmospheric column, expecting mostly high clouds to push through
with this front, with a couple of showers possible near the 
coast Wednesday night into Thursday morning. Pre-frontal warming
kicks temperatures up to near 80 Wednesday.

Thursday and Friday, mid-level ridging moves in, with high pressure 
at the surface well to the north extending down into the Deep
South and mid-Atlantic regions. Northerly flow comes back into 
the fold, keeping the forecast dry and a slightly cooler airmass
comes in. Highs in the upper 70s Thursday come down to the mid 
70s by Friday. Lows each night in the mid-to-upper 50s.

Saturday, a more potent upper low ejecting out of the ArkLaTex 
region moves ENE, dragging a front from the Gulf. Very noticeable 
upticks in moisture here, possibly bringing a rainy weekend.
Timing is the biggest issue at this time, but those details 
will sort themselves out.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
VFR to dominate this period. Mostly clear skies with just a few
passing cirrus clouds for majority of the area, with high clouds
clearing out later today. Exception is coastal SE NC, where high
clouds will be more abundant for the rest of today, and may see
a few mid clouds overnight. Low clouds around 2500 ft may move
in from the north around exiting system moving up the NC coast
and impact ILM tomorrow morning, but at this time expect more
scattered nature vs ceilings. No fog forecasted overnight, but
wouldn't be surprised to see patchy/brief MVFR visibilities at
times mainly across inland NE SC. Current gusty north winds will
quickly diminish over the next few of hours, with calm/light
winds overnight and remaining light out of the north tomorrow.

Extended Outlook...VFR to dominate this period with 
the exception for periodic MVFR/IFR during the Tue thru Thu 
early morning hrs due to possible low clouds and/or vsby 
restrictions from fog.

&&

.MARINE...
Through Tonight:
Low pressure offshore from the NC and SC Coasts this morning,
will lift northward along a relatively stationary front well
offshore oriented south to north. The sfc pg will be at it's
tightest this morning, ie. winds at their strongest across the
waters, followed by a relaxing trend (winds slowly diminishing)
as the low pulls further away from the area waters. Seas will
follow the same trend but slower. SCA may possibly continue 
beyond noon today for the NC waters, mainly due to residual 6 ft
seas from Cape Fear northward. Seas will be dominated by 7 to 9
second period NE swell with an underlying 11+ second period 
fading swell. Pcpn in the form of light rainshowers, associated 
with the low, may affect the local waters from Cape Fear 
northward briefly early this morning thru mid-afternoon. 

Monday through Thursday: 
Northeasterly flow continues through Tuesday, with the gradient
wind relaxing from 10-15kts to around 10kts. As a result, wind
waves die down just a bit from 2-3ft Monday to 1-3ft Tuesday. 
Winds veer easterly Tuesday night, settling on SSW by Wednesday 
ahead of a cold front. Front pushes offshore Wednesday night, 
and northeasterly flow quickly returns by Thursday. Seas remain 
steady at 1-3ft.

&&

.ILM WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SC...None.
NC...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...ILM
UPDATE...VAO
NEAR TERM...DCH
SHORT TERM...IGB
LONG TERM...IGB
AVIATION...VAO
MARINE...DCH/IGB
