FXUS62 KRAH 231803
AFDRAH

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Raleigh NC
203 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A mid and upper-level low and accompanying surface wave will track 
toward the southern Mid Atlantic coast through Monday, while high 
pressure will otherwise extend across the interior Mid Atlantic and 
Appalachians through early Wednesday. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
As of 1045 AM Sunday...

A closed mid/upper-level low just off the srn NC coast this morning 
will become an open wave trough while lifting nwd across the srn Mid 
Atlantic coastal region through tonight, while a ridge will amplify 
across the Deep South. 

At the surface, a wavy frontal zone analyzed through at least three 
1011-1014 mb circulation centers stretching from about 300 miles 
east-southeast of CHS to a couple of others 70 miles northeast and 
60 miles southeast of HSE, respectively, will remain quasi-
stationary. Visible satellite data indicate the srn-most circulation 
center east of CHS is moving ene just to the south of buoy 41002, 
while the ones just offshore the NC Outer Banks are nearly 
stationary and are forecast to make little additional wwd progress 
through tonight. 1032 mb high pressure centered over the Northeast 
will otherwise continue to extend south across the interior Mid 
Atlantic and cntl through srn Appalachians. 

Moisture will gradually increase and deepen amid the nely/nnely flow 
between the ridge and the offshore frontal zone, as evidence by the 
marked increase in PW and mean mixing ratio of over 1" and 6 g/kg, 
respectively, from 00Z to 12Z/23 at WAL. As a result, an area of low 
stratus, which has reached RWI and GWW in the past hour, will 
continue to edge swwd across the nrn and cntl NC Coastal Plain 
today. It will also be in those areas where a slight chance of rain, 
with light amounts of just a few hundredths of an inch at most, and 
high temperatures in the lwr-mid 60s, are forecast. Temperatures 
will range through the lwr 70s, beneath considerable high clouds 
across the ne Piedmont, Sandhills, srn Coastal Plain, to lwr-mid 70s 
with mostly sunny conditions over the srn and wrn Piedmont.

Low temperatures will again follow that distribution of cloud cover, 
with generally lwr 50s where clouds are most pervasive, and which 
may lower into a fog layer by Mon morning, through the Coastal 
Plain, to lwr-mid 40s over the srn/wrn Piedmont. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY AND MONDAY NIGHT/...
As of 340 AM Sunday...

High pressure will persist across much of central NC on Mon, with 
thicknesses rising to around 1380m, about 10m higher than Sun, 
supporting highs above normal in the mid-upper 70s in the 
central/south and lower to mid-70s across the north. A mid-level 
ridge over the Tennessee Valley will shift into the Piedmont by 
early Tue, while the mid-level shear axis tied to the coastal system 
will linger over eastern NC/VA. The coastal surface trough and 
associated surface low (or lows) will pivot slightly to the west but 
remain situated along the NC/VA coasts. Subsidence from the high and 
building upper-ridge should keep skies mostly sunny. Clear skies and 
light winds will favor good radiational cooling Mon night, but with 
temperatures above seasonal norms in the upper 40s to low 50s 
(except middle 40s over the outlying areas of the Piedmont).

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH SATURDAY/...
As of 330 AM Sunday...

Tuesday: Sandwiched between the lingering/weakening offshore 
trough/closed low off the SE coast and a vigorous southern stream 
trough/closed low progressing east through the ArkLaTex region, 
strong ridging centered over the SE US will result in a continuation 
of dry and moderating conditions across central NC. Highs ranging 
from in the lower 70s north to mid/upper 70s elsewhere.  

Wednesday: The upper level ridge will shift east and offshore 
Tuesday night/early Wednesday as the aforementioned southern-stream 
shortwave trough/closed low lifts NEwd through the OH Valley, 
reaching the Eastern Great Lakes Wednesday night. Low-level 
southerly flow will develop ahead of the attendant weak cold front 
that will cross the area Wednesday evening/night. Well removed from 
the trough dynamics/lift that will be lifting north through the Ohio 
Valley and with insufficient destablization east of the mountains, 
rain chances looking sparse, with little more than isolated WAA 
showers across central NC. Continued warm with highs topping out in 
the lower/mid 70s NW to lower 80s east. 

Thursday through Saturday: In advance of another closed low/upper 
trough tracking eastward across the south central CONUS, upper level 
ridging will redevelop over the SE US to end the work week. However, 
forecast spread is high regarding the timing and magnitude of the 
system into the SE US next weekend. Will have to wait for further 
clarity before getting to specific but dry conditions should prevail 
through Friday, with rain chances increasing over the weekend. 
Temperatures should remain above normal temperatures.


&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 200 PM Sunday... 

Moisture in nnely low level flow has resulted in the wwd expansion 
of an area of MVFR stratus/stratocumulus to as far west as RWI. It 
remains unclear if this cloud layer will hold firm in coverage 
through most of the TAF period, while lifting to ~3000-3500 ft by 
18Z Mon, or if it instead clears out and yields to an IFR-LIFR one 
that would consequently develop there Mon morning. In either event, 
any VFR conditions there are expected to be short-lived. Elsewhere, 
at least scattered 2000-4000 ft stratocumulus are likely to 
develop/spread swwd across RDU and FAY this evening-early tonight, 
when an associated MVFR ceiling will be possible. Meanwhile, the 
presence of drier air over the wrn NC Piedmont should result in 
continued VFR conditions at INT/GSO. 

Outlook: The low-level moisture over the ern VA and NC today will 
linger and favor the redevelopment of areas of IFR-MVFR conditions 
each morning through Tue, especially at RWI, FAY, and RDU.  

&&

.RAH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Kren/MWS
NEAR TERM...MWS
SHORT TERM...Kren
LONG TERM...CBL
AVIATION...MWS
