FXUS62 KRAH 231957
AFDRAH

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Raleigh NC
357 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A mid and upper-level low and accompanying surface wave will track 
toward the southern Mid Atlantic coast through Monday, while high 
pressure will otherwise extend across the interior Mid Atlantic and 
Appalachians through early Wednesday. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
As of 355 PM Sunday...

A deamplifying mid/upper-level low/trough will continue to lift nwd 
across the srn Mid Atlantic coastal region through tonight, while a 
ridge will amplify across the Deep South. 

At the surface, a wavy frontal zone analyzed through at least three 
1012-1014 mb low/circulation centers stretching from ~50 miles 
offshore the NC Outer Banks to near buoy 41002, will remain quasi-
stationary. 1030 mb high pressure centered over the Northeast will 
otherwise continue to extend south across the interior Mid Atlantic 
and cntl through srn Appalachians. 

Moisture will gradually increase and deepen amid the nely/nnely flow 
between the ridge and the offshore frontal zone, as evidence by the 
marked increase in PW and mean mixing ratio of over 1" and 6 g/kg, 
respectively, from 00Z to 12Z/23 at WAL. As a result, an area of 
stratocumulus, which has reached HNZ to GSB to DPL in the past 
couple of hours, will continue to edge swwd into the ne Piedmont and 
ern Sandhills, while thinning in coverage, through early tonight.
Low temperatures will again follow that distribution of cloud cover, 
with generally lwr 50s where clouds are most pervasive, and which 
may lower into a fog layer by Mon morning, through the Coastal 
Plain, to lwr-mid 40s over the srn/wrn Piedmont. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY AND MONDAY NIGHT/...
As of 345 PM Sunday...

A mid/upper-level trough axis will continue to extend across e-cntl 
VA/NC this period, while an increasingly-amplified ridge builds east 
into the srn and cntl Appalachians. 

At the surface, low pressure centered broadly about 50 miles east of 
the NC Outer Banks this afternoon will drift nnw toward and across 
the DelMarVa and Chesapeake Bay, while weakening. High pressure will 
otherwise continue to extend across the cntl/srn Appalachians and 
Carolinas. 

Although high-level moisture will be at a minimum in the trough axis 
over cntl NC, lingering low-level moisture will manifest as 
stratocumulus and associated partly to perhaps occasionally mostly 
cloudy conditions over the ne Piedmont and nrn-cntl Coastal Plain - 
similar in distribution to Sunday. 

Continued modification of the airmass related to the high pressure 
over the region will favor warmer temperatures ranging from low 70s 
northeast to upper 70s across the srn Piedmont and Sandhills. While 
calm within the surface ridge axis will favor strong radiational 
cooling throughout cntl NC Mon night, areas of stratocumulus may 
linger, as that moisture will be slow to disperse in the light flow 
regime in place. If so, low temperatures will be milder and in the 
lwr 50s where clouds remain, ranging to lwr-mid 40s where skies are 
expected to remain clear over the srn and wrn Piedmont. If the 
stratocumulus dissipates and skies clear in the Coastal Plain, not 
only will temperatures be similarly cool in the 40s, but areas of 
(possibly dense) fog would be favored in that residually more-moist 
environment.  

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
As of 205 PM Sunday...

As Monday's upper level feature fills, upper level ridging will 
briefly extend across the East Coast, allowing dry weather to 
continue. The upper level system that will develop across the 
southern Plains will move northeast Tuesday and Wednesday, but the 
bulk of the forcing will remain across the Ohio River Valley. While 
slight chance pops were inherited in the forecast, deterministic and 
ensemble models are quite anemic for any chance of rain, and after 
collaborating with neighbors, have decided to remove pops from the 
forecast.

Behind the Wednesday system, high pressure will dominate the eastern 
United States Thursday and Friday. The GEFS is the most aggressive 
bringing precipitation into North Carolina, far earlier than the 
EPS, GFS, or ECMWF. Will keep pops dry Friday night, then increase 
pops through the weekend. Considering the speed of the system, the 
chance for rain is likely to continue into early next weekend.

Temperatures should peak Tuesday and Wednesday before the cold front 
moves through, then slowly drop each of the next few days in a trend 
towards normal temperatures. There are some signs that cold-air 
damming could develop in advance of the approaching system, which 
may drop temperatures lower than the current forecast of mid 60s to 
mid 70s for Sunday.


&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 200 PM Sunday... 

Moisture in nnely low level flow has resulted in the wwd expansion 
of an area of MVFR stratus/stratocumulus to as far west as RWI. It 
remains unclear if this cloud layer will hold firm in coverage 
through most of the TAF period, while lifting to ~3000-3500 ft by 
18Z Mon, or if it instead clears out and yields to an IFR-LIFR one 
that would consequently develop there Mon morning. In either event, 
any VFR conditions there are expected to be short-lived. Elsewhere, 
at least scattered 2000-4000 ft stratocumulus are likely to 
develop/spread swwd across RDU and FAY this evening-early tonight, 
when an associated MVFR ceiling will be possible. Meanwhile, the 
presence of drier air over the wrn NC Piedmont should result in 
continued VFR conditions at INT/GSO. 

Outlook: The low-level moisture over the ern VA and NC today will 
linger and favor the redevelopment of areas of IFR-MVFR conditions 
each morning through Tue, especially at RWI, FAY, and RDU.  

&&

.RAH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Kren/MWS
NEAR TERM...MWS
SHORT TERM...MWS
LONG TERM...Green
AVIATION...MWS
