FXUS65 KPUB 220113
AFDPUB

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Pueblo CO
713 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 711 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Updated forecast to expire Red Flag Warning which was in effect
for parts of the region. Also updated gridds to reflect ongoing
weather. \/Hodanish

&&

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Sunday night)
Issued at 358 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Key Messages:

1) Warm and breezy with critical fire weather conditions expected across 
   the plains on Saturday. 

2) Widespread snow and blowing Saturday night and Sunday across the higher 
   terrain along the Continental Divide

3) Windy to very windy conditions expected across all of south central and 
   southeast Colorado on Sunday, leading to high fire danger and possible
   critical fire weather conditions.     

Tonight-Saturday...Model data remains in good agreement of increasing 
west to southwest flow aloft across the region through the day tomorrow, 
as a strong eastern Pacific storm system, moving onshore across the Pacific
Northwest Coast this afternoon, remains progged to translate into the Great
Basin region through the day Saturday. With the increasing west to southwest 
flow and expected deep mixing, will see breezy westerly winds of 15 to 25 mph
with gusts of 35 mph across most of southeast Colorado, and combined with dry
air in place and rhs around 10 percent, the current Red Flag Warning from 
11 am to 7 pm still remains on track. Good mixing and the downslope flow will 
also help to keep overnight lows on the mild side, especially in the banana 
belt along and west of the I-25 Corridor, with highs on Saturday expected to 
be above seasonal levels in the 70s and 80s across the eastern plains, and 
mainly in the 50s and 60s across the higher terrain, save for 30s and 40s 
at the peaks.  

Saturday night-Sunday night...Models continue to be in good agreement with 
the movement of Great Basin system across northwestern Colorado and 
into the Northern Rockies, with a strong jet core translating across 
south central and southeast Colorado through the day Sunday. This will 
bring windy to very windy conditions to the region, with the potential 
for strong downslope winds developing across the southern Sangre de Cristo
Mtns late Saturday Night and spreading out into the lower elevations of 
the southern I-25 Corridor Sunday morning, as mtn top winds approach 
50 to 60 kts, along with period of neutral shear before winds aloft 
increase later Sunday morning and afternoon. This increasing flow aloft 
will also bring strong and gusty winds to the rest of the higher terrain 
and the southeast plains on Sunday, with the potential of seeing gusts of 
50 to 60 mph continuing through the day Sunday, strongest across the plains
along and south of the Highway 50 Corridor, as the upper system and associated
cold front aloft translates across the south central and southeast Colorado. 
This will also lead to possible critical fire weather conditions once again, 
especially across the southeast plains, where the warmest temperatures are 
expected, along with possible areas of reduced visibilities in blowing dust. 
With that said, we have issued  a high wind watch for the southern Sangres and
the southern I-25 Corridor for late Saturday night and Sunday, with the potential 
of a high wind watch/warning being extended further east on Sunday. We have also 
issued a Fire Weather Watch for the southeast Plains on Sunday, which could also
be expanded if necessary, as with the expected strong winds, fire danger will be 
high across much of the area.   

In addition, the strong west to southwest upslope flow and increasing moisture 
associated with the passing system, will bring widespread precipitation to the 
higher terrain, especially along and west of the ContDvd, where the first 
significant snowfall of the season. While total snowfall amounts continue to 
vary between advisory and warning criteria, the snow combined with the strong 
winds will create hazardous travel conditions across the higher mountain passes 
of the ContDvd late Saturday night and through the day on Sunday, and being the 
first winter weather evening of the season, we issued a Winter Storm Watch from 
Saturday evening through Sunday night for the eastern San Juan, La Garita and eastern 
Sawatch Mtns. With the passing trough, will see scattered scattered showers spreading 
across the high mtn valleys through the eastern mts and immediate adjacent plains through 
Sunday night, with some light snow accumulations possible as snow levels drop to between 
7-8K ft Sunday and down to 5 K ft Sunday night.  

.LONG TERM...(Monday through Friday)
Issued at 358 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

1)Lower confidence in specific weather impacts when another trough 
of low pressure traverses over or near the region late next week.

Monday...Medium range guidance is a little quicker with the passing 
mid-level shortwave trough of low pressure across southeastern 
Colorado. Due to this quicker movement we collaborated a quicker 
decrease in PoPs and precipitation Monday. This wave will also 
provide much cooler air with daytime temperatures nearly 20 degrees 
below late October averages. Overnight lows heading into Tuesday 
morning should officially put an end to our growing season in 
southern Colorado.

Tuesday -  Wednesday...Warming trend expected as the mid-level 
pattern flattens out a bit ahead of the next potential digging mid-
level trough. Expecting mostly dry days with lighter winds which 
should help abate any fire weather issues.

Thursday - Friday...This far out we're talking about much lower 
confidence on weather impacts across the region, at least in terms 
of magnitude and specifics. The potential does exist for more higher 
elevation snows, stronger winds, and more elevated fire weather 
conditions over the plains. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 358 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Today...VFR. Stronger west-northwest winds this morning at KPUB/KCOS 
will decrease a bit this afternoon and back towards the south-
southwest. KALS will see winds veer to the southwest this afternoon 
with a few gusts possible. Mostly clear skies expected as well. High 
confidence.

Tonight...VFR. Gusts drop off shortly after sunset keeping a south-
southwest breeze across the region tonight. Mostly clear skies 
should prevail as well. High confidence.


&&

.PUB WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Storm Watch from Saturday evening through late Sunday 
night for COZ060-066-068.

High Wind Watch from late Saturday night through Sunday 
afternoon for COZ074-075-087-088.

Red Flag Warning from 11 AM to 7 PM MDT Saturday for COZ226>237.

Fire Weather Watch from Sunday morning through Sunday evening 
for COZ231>237.

&&

$$

UPDATE...HODANISH
SHORT TERM...MW
LONG TERM...HEAVENER
AVIATION...HEAVENER
