FXUS63 KAPX 231856
AFDAPX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Gaylord MI
256 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.NEAR TERM...(Through Tonight)
Issued at 254 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Unseasonably Warm Weather Continues...

High Impact Weather Potential: Minimal. Low end non-severe 
thunderstorm chances tonight. 

Pattern Synopsis/Forecast:

Text book long wave configuration to drive unseasonably warm air 
north into the Great Lakes continues, with the region centered 
between east coast ridging and deep Intermountain West troughing. 
Low pressure organizing out ahead of that deep troughing in the 
northern Plains only helping the warming cause as it drives 
increasing southerly flow north into our area. The result, well 
above normal temperatures, with current readings punching up into 
the 70s across a good portion of our area. Not quite records, but 
well above normal indeed.

While the warm weather looks to continue, some changes in the offing 
as weak shortwave trough rotates north tonight within that deep 
southerly flow. Attendant low level jet and return of somewhat 
deeper moisture will result in some increasing shower chances 
tonight. 

Primary Forecast Concerns/Challenges:

Temperature trends and addressing those overnight shower concerns.

Details:

Low level jet ramps up this evening with arrival of that weak 
shortwave trough. Surge of deeper moisture tied to that jet, with 
precipitable water values pushing one and a quarter inches by later 
this evening. Couple that increasing moisture with low level mass 
response/isentropic uplift on nose of that low level jet and shower 
chances will be on the increase, with best potential remaining west 
of Interstate 75 where forced convergence/moisture advection is 
maximized. Cannot completely rule out a rumble of thunder or two, 
with somewhat respectable mid level lapse rates and elevated 
instability pushing a few hundred Joules/kg. Definitely nothing 
severe, with just some isolated pockets of heavier rain tied to any 
thunder activity. Speaking of rain, definitely not looking at 
anything significant, with most areas likely seeing under a tenth of 
an inch by morning (with several areas likely not seeing any rain at 
all). Perhaps bigger story tonight will be the continuation of 
exceptionally mild conditions, with gusty southeast winds and 
increasing clouds allowing temperatures to only drop into the 50s 
(these values are actually a bit above what are normal HIGH 
temperatures for today's date).

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Monday through Wednesday)
Issued at 254 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Mild and rainy...

High Impact Weather Potential: Minimal for now.  

Synopsis/Forecast: Troughing moving into the Plains breaks up into 
two pieces of energy, the northern one lifting through Ontario and 
the southern piece becoming a cutoff through the southern Plains and 
southern Mississippi Valley. The southern piece lifts toward the 
Great Lakes on Tuesday with abnormally high moisture moving into the 
region. At the surface a deep cyclone will move from the Dakotas 
Monday into Hudson Bay by Tuesday, dragging a cold front over us 
through Tuesday...which looks to briefly stall over the region as 
another surface low (aided by the southern cutoff) rides up along it 
into the lower Great Lakes.  

Even though we'll have anomalously high moisture over us early week, 
the best moisture transport will be well to our north in Ontario, on 
the nose of a very broad 40-50kt 850mb jet. PWATs will be up around 
1.3" (2 to 3 St. Dev above normal) over us Monday. With this 
tropical-based moisture it shouldn't take much lift to squeeze out 
some showers early Monday, but any showers that do form will have to 
get through relatively dry low levels...with the best chances along 
and west of 131. Much of the area stays dry Monday night until a 
narrow ribbon of high moisture approaches ahead of the cold 
front...set to move through the region Tuesday, bringing rain 
trekking west to east with it. Some signals for heavy rain potential 
with good moisture transport into the region and enhanced 
convergence with the additional sfc low moving in from the south. 
With warm cloud depths around 10 kft and the K-index at 30 early 
Tuesday night looks the best time frame for wide spread soaking 
rain, with locally heavy downpours. Even with the bouts of heavy 
rain we'll likely see 1.5" or less over the 36 hour period starting 
early Tuesday. By Wednesday the front will slowly exit stage right 
through the day. As better moisture and synoptic lift move out 
shower chances decrease, especially through the afternoon as much 
drier low level air moves in. 

Cooling temperatures through early week, with upper 40's common by 
midweek.

&&

.LONG TERM...(Wednesday night through Sunday)
Issued at 254 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...More dry time with temperatures near normal...

High Impact Weather Potential: Minimal for now. 

Strung-out troughing moves through the Plains late week, with the 
base of the trough becoming (yet again) a cutoff moving through the 
southern Plains. A couple weak waves look to move past the Great 
Lakes with minimal impact. The southern cutoff lifts up toward the 
Lakes late in the weekend, possibly bringing slight chances of 
showers in the southeast, but confidence in this is low, as ridging 
both in upper and lower levels will be trying to hang on. 
Temperature-wise we'll be near normal for late October with highs in 
the low to mid 50s.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1238 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions expected through the TAF period, although scattered 
rather high based shower and isolated thunderstorms do arrive 
tonight into early Monday morning. Low level wind shear returns 
again this evening through tonight. Surface winds out of the south-
southeast will remain a bit gusty at times.

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 254 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Southeast winds will be on the increase tonight as deep low pressure 
moves up into the northern Plains. Widespread small craft advisory 
conditions expected. Gusty southeast to south winds look to continue 
through Monday night before slowly subsiding Tuesday. Increasing 
shower chances tonight, especially across northern Lake Michigan. 
May even hear a rumble of thunder or two. Rain chances end Monday, 
returning again Monday night into Tuesday.

&&

.APX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MI...NONE.
LH...Small Craft Advisory from 8 PM this evening to 11 AM EDT Monday 
     for LHZ346>349.
LM...Small Craft Advisory from 8 PM this evening to 11 AM EDT Monday 
     for LMZ323-341-342-344-345.
     Small Craft Advisory until 11 AM EDT Monday for LMZ346.
LS...Small Craft Advisory from 8 PM this evening to 11 AM EDT Monday 
     for LSZ321.
&&

$$

NEAR TERM...MSB
SHORT TERM...STJ
LONG TERM...STJ
AVIATION...MSB
MARINE...MSB
