FXUS63 KDTX 231759
AFDDTX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Detroit/Pontiac MI
159 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022


.AVIATION...

VFR conditions will carry through the forecast as we remain under 
the influence of high pressure centered off to the northeast. Winds 
will remain southeasterly but gusts won't be as much of an issue as 
previous days. Patch of mid cloud lifting through the area around 
8kft will exit north this evening, leaving clear skies or thin 
cirrus for the rest of the night. River of elevated moisture to the 
west in the deep southwesterly flow will stay to the west but will 
lead to continued batches of elevated clouds into Monday. 

 DTW THRESHOLD PROBABILITIES...

* None.

&&

.PREV DISCUSSION...
Issued at 353 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

DISCUSSION...

Another outstanding late October/mid fall day is in store for the 
Great Lakes featuring dry weather and well above normal 
temperatures. A return to highs in the lower to mid 70s is likely 
but with lower potential for the upper end of the range. Full sun 
will be disrupted by noticeably greater coverage of high clouds 
compared to Saturday as a mid level trough slides overhead from the 
Ohio valley. A slight deflection of the low level thermal ridge is 
also shown by a few degrees of cooling at the top of the 925 mb 
mixed layer in model soundings. Overall, these are minor obstacles 
to a repeat of readings 10 to 15 degrees above normal to finish off 
the weekend. 

Equally mild conditions continue tonight and Monday with a 
thickening component of high clouds. The short wave moving overhead 
this afternoon exits northward in favor of continued deep SW flow 
associated with the long wave trough stretching from central Canada 
to the 4 corners region. A glancing shot of elevated moisture 
transport brings the clouds into SE Mi which could also be capable 
of patchy light rain late tonight and Monday morning in Tri Cities 
area. Model mean RH and QPF trends are supportive of potential for a 
few 100ths of rainfall in the most recent model cycles before giving 
way to just mostly cloudy sky Monday afternoon. 

Dry weather and deep SW low level flow carry forward the warm 
temperature pattern Monday night leading to a 5th day in a row of 
high temperatures in the 70s by Tuesday afternoon. This is 
impressive as clouds remain plentiful ahead of the broad low 
pressure and frontal system stretching from central Canada into 
Texas. The system edges closer but still remains west of Lower Mi 
Tuesday afternoon with good agreement among the various 
deterministic models. The parent mid level circulation is shown 
lifting into northern Ontario while the front stalls in wait on the 
ArkLaTex circulation rounding the base of the long wave trough. This 
system is helped northward by an impressive surge of height falls 
moving inland from the Pac NW, effectively retrograding the long 
wave pattern and sending the ArkLaTex circulation on a path into the 
Great Lakes. An abundant supply of Gulf moisture is shown moving in 
with the system which carries PW into the 1.0-1.25 range, in the 
90th percentile of the DTX upper air climatology. A slower onset is 
preserved from the previous forecast in the form of a sharper west 
to east POP gradient in SE Mi Tuesday afternoon. Blended model POP 
guidance is then on track with a trend toward the categorical range 
Tuesday night into Wednesday as the mid level closed low forms a 
strong trowal over the region before the system exits into Ontario 
during the afternoon.  

Temperatures take a couple steps down into the 50s in the rainy 
conditions Wednesday and then hold there during the late week 
period. Extended range models show passage of the Wednesday system 
is followed by a mid level short wave ridge and a broad area of 
surface high pressure settling in by Thursday. The inbound air mass 
is of continental origin but is mild enough to hold temperatures 
around normal into next weekend.

MARINE...

Southerly winds will be persisting today into early next week as the 
Great Lakes remains sandwiched into between high pressure along the 
East Coast and developing low pressure over the Plains. Wind speeds 
will hold predominately in the in the 15 to 25 knots range, with the 
stronger winds focused over the open waters of Lake Huron. 

The strong low pressure system over the plains will be tracking well 
west of the Great Lakes region early next week. Thus, it appears 
winds will continue to remain under 25 knots with the warm advection 
pattern Monday as low level jet is over Western Great Lakes. The 
cold front/cold advection by mid week also looks subdued as well. 
However, showers are looking increasingly likely, as a second low 
comes out of the Gulf Coast States and tracks along the front.

&&

.DTX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MI...None.
Lake Huron...None.
Lake St Clair...None.
Michigan waters of Lake Erie...None.
&&

$$

AVIATION.....DRK
DISCUSSION...BT
MARINE.......SF


You can obtain your latest National Weather Service forecasts online
at www.weather.gov/detroit.
