FXUS63 KMQT 232025
AFDMQT

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Marquette MI
425 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(The Rest of This Afternoon)
Issued at 116 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

Sunny skies and anomalously warm air over top of us this afternoon 
have allowed temps to already reach the mid 60s in the east and 
west. As the mostly sunny conditions continue, expect the temps to 
rise a few more degrees this afternoon, with some spots in the west 
getting into the low 70s. As a warm front approaches from the 
southwest near sunset, expect cloud cover to increase near the WI 
border and Lake MI late today. In addition, with the warm front 
approaching, conditions may become progressively breezy this 
afternoon, with some southerly wind gusts up to 35 mph possible in 
the higher elevations.

.LONG TERM...(Tonight through Sunday)
Issued at 425 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

Well-advertised incoming trough with low leading the way will be
grazing past the U.P. tomorrow, with continued WAA out ahead of
it, followed by a cold front traversing across. It'll take some
time for the coldest air to finally filter into Upper Michigan,
with a reinforcing shot of the cold stuff holding off until
mid-week. 

How does the forecast look for tonight through Tuesday, courtesy
of said disturbance? Fairly well on track, although did lower PoPs
a bit on Monday due to some dry slotting before the front-driven
activity ramps back up late Monday into Tuesday. Thunder potential
still exists, but have continued to cap it at slights. The CAMs,
unsurprisingly, are a bit more robust on instability/thunder
chances compared to other types of guidance for these latest runs,
but am approaching that with a grain of salt, knowing their
tendencies and biases. Regardless, the best instability will stay
more tightly compact around the passing low itself, i.e. to the W
of the land portions of the forecast area, contributing to the 
concept that slights for thunder should sufficiently cover the 
lightning forecast for tonight into tomorrow. Trends will need to
be monitored and adjusted accordingly of course, though, since 
this is an anomalous event under such a warm, moist push of air 
this far N for late October. With the activity associated with the
front, thunder potential remains to appear null. But, as alluded
to, the moisture will be running anomalously high, with deep 
PWATs running near to above the max moving average for this time 
of year. Therefore, localized brief moderate downpours may be 
possible, and should there be just enough instability to further
enhance cell growth, localized brief heavy downpours can't be
ruled out. With the front's slow progression in addition to trough
phasing occurring aloft, PoPs remain in the forecast for the E
into early Wednesday. It then dries out for a bit as a sfc high
passes through. Shortwave on its tail bring some lower-end PoPs
back to portions of the U.P. by as early as late Thursday, but the
pattern remains progressive, allowing for what appears to be a
mostly dry weekend ahead for next weekend.

Due to the above-mentioned setup, very warm lows are expected
tonight with this well-above normal warmth continuing into
tomorrow for highs. Temps will be on the decline tomorrow night
due to said frontal boundary, and have adjusted hourly temps to
follow the front itself rather than a more typical diurnal curve.
A slight E-W temp gradient emerges on Tuesday for highs, from
warmest to coolest, respectively. Overall temps return closer to
normal for late October to round out the latter half of this week,
although perhaps a couple of degrees on the warmer side late in
the week into next weekend. As a result of temps attempting to
return closer to normal, some SN could mix in Tuesday night and
then again Thursday night in the interior W, but measurable SN
chances currently appear to be little to none.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 101 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

VFR conditions last the rest of this afternoon as sunny skies 
continue. However, as a warm front pushes through tonight, expect 
cigs to deteriorate to MVFR at KCMX/KSAW late tonight/Monday 
morning, with KIWD possibly getting to MVFR after midnight; there is 
a chance that KSAW and KCMX could deteriorate into IFR conditions 
late tonight/Monday morning. LLWS is expected at all TAF sites 
throughout the TAF period as a warm front moves through and brings a 
low level jet over us. This jet is also expected to bring strong 
southerly winds across the TAF sites this afternoon into tomorrow 
morning.
&&

.MARINE...(For the 4 AM Lake Superior forecast issuance)
Issued at 245 AM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

A low lifting through the Northern Plains today will support mostly 
southerly to southeasterly flow over the eastern half of Lake 
Superior and winds curving down toward Duluth Harbor in the west. 
Winds are generally expected to top out 20-25 kts. As the low 
continues to deepen and lift north-northeast into Canada tonight and 
Monday, pressure falls and an amplifying LLJ overhead will increase 
winds. With the airmass overhead expected to be warmer then Lake 
Superior, the stable airmass will make mixing the LLJ to the surface 
difficult, likely resulting in higher reporting platforms seeing 
stronger winds then the surface. At the moment, winds look largely 
to top out near 30kts, but places like Stannard Rock may see some 
gales. It should be noted that the experimental NBM 4.1 guidance 
does suggest higher probabilities of some gale force gusts east of 
the Keweenaw Monday. At this point though, decided to hold off on a 
gale watch/warning but future forecast packages may include one.

A cold front will slowly meander through Monday night and Tuesday, 
supporting winds becoming southwesterly and westerly after the 
passage. They'll also weaken and are largely expected to be below 20 
kts by Tuesday morning. High pressure building in afterwards will 
keep winds light for the remainder of the week.
&&

.MQT WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Upper Michigan...
None.
Lake Superior...
  Gale Warning from 7 AM to 5 PM EDT Monday for LSZ249-250-266.

Lake Michigan...
None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...TAP
LONG TERM...lg
AVIATION...TAP
MARINE...JTP
