FXUS63 KMQT 231701
AFDMQT

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Marquette MI
101 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(Today) 
Issued at 342 AM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

An unseasonably warm night is currently occurring with the UP under 
the influence of WAA.  Temperatures across the area are generally in 
the 50s with even some low 60s to the far southwest.  The current 
synoptic setup consists of a well-defined low sitting over the Rocky 
Mountain Foothills with its associated warm front extending 
northeastward from South Dakota to Lake Superior.  So, what this 
means for Upper Michigan is another day of above normal temperatures 
in the upper 60s to low 70s.  Increasing cloud cover ahead of the 
aforementioned system and a southeasterly wind component at the 
surface though should inhibit temperatures from reaching widespread 
70s. Meanwhile, a robust LLJ will result in a windy day with 
sustained speeds in the 15 to 20 mph range out of the SSE, gusting 
up to 35 mph.

.LONG TERM...(Tonight through Friday) 
Issued at 245 AM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

Broad troughing over western CONUS and ridging riding up the east 
coast will gradually break down today through Monday night, as the 
trough axis kicks east into the Plains, takes on a negative tilt, 
and supports surface cyclogensis in the lee of the Rockies. The 
resulting low is expected to lift north-northeast toward the eastern 
Dakotas/MN and then toward Hudson Bay Monday night. As the low 
deepens to around 980-985mb tonight, increasing southerly flow and 
isentropically/WAA forced rain showers look to move over the 
forecast area. Guidance is picking up on some elevated instability, 
so some rumbles of thunder can't be ruled out. Shower/t-storm 
activity looks to persist into Monday morning. Between yesterday's 
runs and tonights, Monday afternoon is trending drier. At this point 
I wouldn't be surprised if much of the region stays dry for the 
afternoon before the system's cold front enters into the picture and 
the takes its sweet time to sweep through the region. With the cold 
front's slow progression, expecting showers to gradually shift 
eastward beginning Monday night and persist in the eastern UP into 
Tuesday night. Amplifying LLJ at 925mb approaches 40-50kts late 
tonight into Monday, which will support stronger southerly winds and 
continued WAA. Particular areas of interest where some stronger 
winds could mix to the surface will be the downslope regions late 
tonight into Monday where some 30 mph winds can't be ruled out. By 
Monday, widespread 30-40 mph winds will be possible, with some 
isolated higher amounts possible in the downslope areas. Temps on 
Monday will continue to max out well above normal and most locations 
should climb into the 60s with some low 70s being possible in the 
west. 

As the first system amplifies and lifts through the Plains tonight, 
a southern stream is expected to follow, ejecting out of the 
southern Rockies into the southern Plains Monday. This system looks 
to get caught in the first's cold front, which will allow it to 
track into the Ohio River Valley Wednesday as the first low pulls 
away. There is good clustering and agreement among the EPS, GEFS, 
and GEPS ensemble members, keeping the low south and east of our 
region. 

Following the initial cold front, temps are expected to return to 
normal. The passage of a secondary and dry cold front Wednesday 
morning will further support this trend. By Wednesday, expect the 
warm spots to top out near 50F while the cooler spots max out in the 
40s. These conditions appear to linger toward the weekend as high 
pressure settles overhead.
&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 101 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

VFR conditions last the rest of this afternoon as sunny skies 
continue. However, as a warm front pushes through tonight, expect 
cigs to deteriorate to MVFR at KCMX/KSAW late tonight/Monday 
morning, with KIWD possibly getting to MVFR after midnight; there is 
a chance that KSAW and KCMX could deteriorate into IFR conditions 
late tonight/Monday morning. LLWS is expected at all TAF sites 
throughout the TAF period as a warm front moves through and brings a 
low level jet over us. This jet is also expected to bring strong 
southerly winds across the TAF sites this afternoon into tomorrow 
morning.
&&

.MARINE...(For the 4 AM Lake Superior forecast issuance)
Issued at 245 AM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

A low lifting through the Northern Plains today will support mostly 
southerly to southeasterly flow over the eastern half of Lake 
Superior and winds curving down toward Duluth Harbor in the west. 
Winds are generally expected to top out 20-25 kts. As the low 
continues to deepen and lift north-northeast into Canada tonight and 
Monday, pressure falls and an amplifying LLJ overhead will increase 
winds. With the airmass overhead expected to be warmer then Lake 
Superior, the stable airmass will make mixing the LLJ to the surface 
difficult, likely resulting in higher reporting platforms seeing 
stronger winds then the surface. At the moment, winds look largely 
to top out near 30kts, but places like Stannard Rock may see some 
gales. It should be noted that the experimental NBM 4.1 guidance 
does suggest higher probabilities of some gale force gusts east of 
the Keweenaw Monday. At this point though, decided to hold off on a 
gale watch/warning but future forecast packages may include one.

A cold front will slowly meander through Monday night and Tuesday, 
supporting winds becoming southwesterly and westerly after the 
passage. They'll also weaken and are largely expected to be below 20 
kts by Tuesday morning. High pressure building in afterwards will 
keep winds light for the remainder of the week.
&&

.MQT WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Upper Michigan...
None.
Lake Superior...
None.
Lake Michigan...
None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...TDUD
LONG TERM...JTP
AVIATION...TAP
MARINE...JTP
