FXUS63 KAPX 231638
AFDAPX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Gaylord MI
1238 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 952 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Main story today is the unseasonably warm temperatures. Southerly 
flow again on the increase, driving those warm temperatures north 
into northern Michigan. Again, looking at widespread readings in the 
lower and middle 70s this afternoon...this despite some increasing 
high and mid level clouds. Another great day to finish up those 
outdoor projects. Still looking at the return of some rain chances 
tonight as moisture surges north into the region. Will address those 
concerns with the afternoon forecast release.

&&

.NEAR TERM...(Today through Tonight)
Issued at 227 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Warm and breezy today...

High Impact Weather Potential: None.

Pattern Synopsis/Forecast: Early this morning, a mid-level wave is 
moving north across the central Plains and mid-MS Valley on the 
leading edge of much more robust longwave troughing centered over 
the Intermountain West. Ridging exists off the Atlantic coast 
through Quebec into far northern Ontario. The expectation today is 
for that initial shortwave to trek across the forecast area with 
little fanfare while deep southerly flow remains the rule. 
Isentropically driven scattered shower/storm chances arrive for the 
second half of the night ahead as deepening surface low pressure 
barrels through the Dakotas to near the international border by 12z 
Monday.

Primary Forecast Concerns: Increasing shower/storm chances late 
tonight.

Little in the way of sensible weather expected today into this 
evening, although a bit more cloud cover than yesterday likely to
eventually prevail with some scattered mid-high cloud atop a 
midday and afternoon cu field, especially away from the shorelines
of the Great Lakes. Another mild day, however, on the heels of 
deep southerly flow with temperatures some 20 or so degrees above 
normal for late October...highs largely in the upper 60s to 
mid-70s. As alluded to above, south-southeast winds will be the 
rule, gusting as high as 25-30 mph. 

While it's not out of the question that a few isolated showers pop 
up after 02-03z this evening, better chances for scattered shower 
and thunderstorm activity (elevated CAPE progged up to 250 J/kg) 
holds off until after 06z with the highest chances west of I-75 
across both eastern upper and northwest lower MI. These chances look 
to continue to percolate across the forecast area through mid-Monday 
morning or so. Lows tonight's bottoming out around what typical high 
temps would be this time of year...largely in the low-mid 50s area-
wide.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Monday through Tuesday)
Issued at 227 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Rain shower to start Monday, dry until Tuesday then more rain... 

High Impact Weather Potential...Thunderstorms possible Monday 
morning, but unlikely to produce severe weather. 

Pattern Synopsis/Forecast and Possible Impacts...Monday, There is an 
initial surge with the warm front, that looks to produce some 
showers and thunderstorms (elevated) through Monday morning. The 
cold front is back at the Mississippi River at 12z/Mon. The models 
move the cold front east to W Upper and in NW Wisconsin by 00z/Tue. 
This leaves the forecast area in the warm sector, which looks dry 
through at least 09z/Tues. By Tuesday morning, the rain begins in E 
Upper (western Chippewa and Mackinac counties). It looks like 
sometime between 09z and 12z/Tues. The models still show a break 
between the main forcing mechanisms north and south. The least QPF 
looks to move through the forecast area, so we'll get wet, but it 
looks like the better amounts will be north and south of us, at 
least during the day. Also, it wouldn't surprise me if the rain 
started later in the day on Tuesday due to this break in the 
forcing. As the front proceeds across the forecast area, during the 
day, the low in Arkansas moves north into S Illinois, so some 
dynamic support will help move some of the rain a little more north, 
so measurable rain is more likely. The 500 mb low moves to NW Ohio, 
and it looks like we get in the deformation axis on the NW side of 
the low which would make the rain more categorical. 

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday night through Saturday)
Issued at 227 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

High Impact Weather Potential...Heavy Rain Wednesday?, probably not, 
but not out of the question.

Extended (Wednesday through Saturday)...Wednesday, the low continues 
to move north, and east as the front moves with it. This would allow 
the rain to linger over lower Michigan through the day. If the rain 
takes long enough during the day, there is a small chance for heavy 
rain out of this with the PWAT around 1.2" on some of the GFS 
soundings. The models have the rain exiting during Wednesday night. 
Thursday, shortwave ridging at 500 mb, in response to a deepening 
trough in New Mexico, looks to keep the region dry through Thursday 
night. Friday and Saturday look to remain dry in either scenario 
(GFS or ECMWF) as some ridging builds at 500 mb over the Upper Great 
Lakes. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1238 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions expected through the TAF period, although scattered 
rather high based shower and isolated thunderstorms do arrive 
tonight into early Monday morning. Low level wind shear returns 
again this evening through tonight. Surface winds out of the south-
southeast will remain a bit gusty at times.

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 227 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A mild airmass for the time of year continues over the Great Lakes 
into early next week. South-southeast winds will be a bit gusty at 
times, although increasing stability should prevent winds from 
reaching max potential. Likely to see borderline small craft 
advisory conditions across at least a handful of our nearshore 
waters through Monday. Dry weather will continue through the daytime 
hours today, with the threat for at least some showers and a few 
rumbles of thunder arriving late tonight into Monday morning.


&&

.APX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MI...NONE.
LH...Small Craft Advisory from 8 PM this evening to 11 AM EDT Monday 
     for LHZ346>349.
LM...Small Craft Advisory from 8 PM this evening to 11 AM EDT Monday 
     for LMZ323-341-342-344-345.
     Small Craft Advisory until 11 AM EDT Monday for LMZ346.
LS...Small Craft Advisory from 8 PM this evening to 11 AM EDT Monday 
     for LSZ321.
&&

$$

UPDATE...MSB
NEAR TERM...MJG
SHORT TERM...JSL
LONG TERM...JSL
AVIATION...MSB
MARINE...MJG
