FXUS63 KGRR 231740
AFDGRR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Grand Rapids MI
140 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

LATEST UPDATE...
Aviation

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1100 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

No substantive changes to the forecast. We continue to monitor
convective threats for tonight. Unusually deep accas have been
present in the area with associated cloud bases in the
neighborhood of 5500-6500 feet above ground level. We recently 
received a moderate turbulence pilot report near KGRR at 8000 feet
above sea level. This is uncommon and almost certainly associated
with the elevated convective instability responsible for the 
accas.

Upstream soundings at DVN and ILX indicate a dry adiabatic layer 
with a base approximately at the 850 mb level. Mid-levels are 
notably warmer, even upstream, so it may be difficult to achieve 
deep convection. Can't rule it out however, especially since 
kinematics and thermodynamics will become more favorable 
immediately to the west, including Lake Michigan, as we move into 
evening with sustained low level theta-e advection.

&&

.DISCUSSION...(Today through next Saturday)
Issued at 342 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

-- Another warm day; scattered showers late tonight --

A deep lee cyclone will emerge from the high plains today, reaching 
the Dakotas tonight. With continued southerly low-level flow, 
another warm day is in store for Lower MI. Somewhat deeper low-level 
moisture (with surface dewpoints in the low/mid 50s F) should allow 
for some cumulus development today, but mostly sunny skies are still 
expected.

Late tonight, the combination of weak forcing for ascent and PW near 
1.2 inches should support scattered showers. Highest PoPs 
(chance) will be carried over the western half of the forecast 
area, in close agreement with latest HREF probs. RAP profiles 
continue to exhibit modest elevated instability, with MUCAPE of 
200-500 J/kg for parcels rooted near 750 mb, so a t-storms are 
possible. Showers will end Mon morning, with a dry and warm day 
thereafter.

-- Rain Tue morning into Wed --

A mid/upper trough will cross the Baja Peninsula this evening, then 
phase weakly with a trough over the southern Rockies tonight. Modest 
cyclogenesis will occur on Mon as this phased trough approaches a 
baroclinic zone in the southern plains. The resulting surface low 
will then propagate northeastward, reaching the vicinity of 
southern IL/IN by 00z Wed, then the vicinity of IN/OH/MI by 12z 
Wed, with EPS and GEFS members still somewhat loosely clustered 
around these mean positions.

Ahead of this approaching low, the EPS-mean PW reaches around 1.4 
inches by 00z Wed. Expect rain to gradually overspread much of the 
the area on Tue as deep-layer QG forcing for ascent (Q-vector 
convergence) increases north of the surface low, with one or several 
periods of steady rain likely for many areas, primarily between Tue
evening and Wed afternoon. Ensemble probs suggest that some 
rainfall amounts of 1+ inch are possible. Rain should end during 
Wed afternoon/evening as the system departs northeastward and 
subsidence/drying occur. 

-- Dry weather Wed night into early Fri --

Ensemble guidance shows broad consensus that surface high pressure 
will build into the Great Lakes region on Wed night, then continue 
into Quebec by Fri. Meanwhile, EPS and GEFS means suggest that 
another upper trough will emerge over the southern Rockies on/around 
Thu night, then interact with a baroclinic zone over the southern 
plains on Fri. Precip probs have trended lower (shifted southward), 
but low-end PoPs will be maintained for Fri afternoon into Sat.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 140 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The threat for thunderstorms does not extend as far east as
previously expected. MKG stands the best chance of all the 
terminals of encountering VCTS/TS, especially in the 03Z-06Z 
timeframe, but this is too small a probability to warrant 
specific mention in the TAF at this time.

Because the threat for precipitation in general has shifted 
westward, I removed any mention of precipitation for easternmost
terminals such as JXN and LAN.

No changes to our expectations regarding low level wind shear
impacting all our terminals overnight.


&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 342 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A deep low will emerge from the lee of the Rockies today, reaching 
the vicinity of eastern ND by Mon morning. This low will maintain
southerly winds over Lake Michigan into early Tue, but a slight 
offshore wind component will tend to limit wave heights within 
waters south of Grand Haven. However, the existing SCA will be 
expanded southward with this update, given the expectation of 
winds to 25 kts within these southern zones. Subsequent updates 
may need to extend this SCA into Mon night.

Winds will gradually veer on Tue, becoming north on Tue 
evening/night. This will occur in response to the approach of 
another area of low pressure that will advance northeastward from 
the mid MS Valley, likely reaching the vicinity of far southern 
MI by 8 AM Wed. A SCA will likely be required for most of the 
nearshore waters from Tue night into perhaps Wed evening. Highest 
waves (4-6 ft) with this northerly flow are expected south of 
South Haven on Wed.


&&

.GRR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MI...None.
LM...Small Craft Advisory until 6 PM EDT Monday for LMZ844>849.

&&

$$

UPDATE...TJT
DISCUSSION...Kenyon
AVIATION...TJT
MARINE...Kenyon
