FXUS63 KDTX 231950
AFDDTX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Detroit/Pontiac MI
350 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.DISCUSSION...

Downstream ridge amplification will occur steadily over the central 
Great Lakes beginning today, peaking Monday night with H5 heights 
reaching 580 dam, then breaking down by late Tuesday afternoon. This 
will allow for a continued period of daytime temperatures running 
some 14 to 17 degrees above normal both Monday and Tuesday with 
readings in the lower 70s. Fairly meridional or upright low level 
jet will get some aid from left exit region dynamics aloft to 
support high based warm advection showers after 08Z tonight over 
western Lower Michigan perhaps clipping the Tri Cities. Otherwise, a 
notable period with dry, picture perfect Autumn weather.

A phasing of the strong PV anomaly/trough with southern stream 
shortwave will cause psuedo edge wave dynamics leading to 
baroclinicity invof the upper Midwest by Wednesday. The system will 
have a whole lot going for it with all indications are the wave will 
become strongly negative tilted as it is kicked rapidly 
northeastward. Preceding stretching deformation is also expected to 
be high end with a fairly lenghty duration of categorical rain 
showers expected ahead of the low center. At this time, the most 
likely area for this to occur is Tuesday night across Western and 
Northern Lower Michigan. While variance still exists with the track 
of the low pressure system lifting through the area on Wednesday 
(SREF notably dry), confidence is increasing on a more dynamic and 
wetter system for Southeast Michigan Wednesday afternoon. Suspect 
the current NBM solution is currently way too dry and significant 
adjustments will be needed.

&&

.MARINE...

Warm and stable airmass in place over the Central Great Lakes 
region, with surface winds backed out of the southeast, 
predominately in the 15 to 20 knot range this afternoon. 

Strong low pressure system over the plains will be tracking well 
west of the Great Lakes region tonight into Monday. Thus, it appears 
winds will peak out around 25 knots with the warm advection pattern 
Monday as low level jet is over Western Great Lakes. The cold 
front/cold advection by mid week also looks rather subdued as well. 
However, showers are expected, as a second low comes out of the Gulf 
Coast States and tracks along the front. Winds behind this second 
low Wednesday evening will be strong, but brief in nature. Gusts of 
30+ knots appear possible before winds quickly settle down for 
Thursday out of the north, and becoming light and variable Thursday 
night as the high pressure center moves overhead.

&&

.PREV DISCUSSION...
Issued at 159 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

AVIATION...

VFR conditions will carry through the forecast as we remain under 
the influence of high pressure centered off to the northeast. Winds 
will remain southeasterly but gusts won't be as much of an issue as 
previous days. Patch of mid cloud lifting through the area around 
8kft will exit north this evening, leaving clear skies or thin 
cirrus for the rest of the night. River of elevated moisture to the 
west in the deep southwesterly flow will stay to the west but will 
lead to continued batches of elevated clouds into Monday. 

 DTW THRESHOLD PROBABILITIES...

* None.


&&

.DTX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MI...None.
Lake Huron...None.
Lake St Clair...None.
Michigan waters of Lake Erie...None.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...CB
MARINE.......CB
AVIATION.....DRK


You can obtain your latest National Weather Service forecasts online
at www.weather.gov/detroit.
