FXUS63 KGRR 231937
AFDGRR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Grand Rapids MI
337 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

LATEST UPDATE...
Discussion/Marine

.DISCUSSION...(This evening through next Sunday)
Issued at 337 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Thunder is now expected to remain north and west of a Chicago to 
Muskegon to Traverse City line per the latest SPC Swody1 outlook. 
This leaves only our far northwest forecast area in the outlook. The 
17Z RAP plan view MUCAPE diagnostic indicates a north-south plume of 
instability over Lake Michigan drifting east and weakening 
overnight. Maximum MUCAPE values decrease to 200 J per kg as this 
plume drifts onshore by 07Z. So, some storms may hit the lakeshore 
north of Muskegon with a glancing blow around this time, but that 
should be the extent of it. 

Measurable precipitation is expected to extend farther east and 
south of the thunder outlook area. However, the 12Z HREF indicates 
precipitation totals on the meager side, remaining below 0.05 even 
along the Lake Michigan lakeshore.

-- Rain Tue morning into Wed --

As noted previously, we are looking at a cutoff low over the Baja 
Peninsula to interact with a broader low over the southwestern U.S. 
in a highly non-linear manner. This will most probably end up as a 
compact upper low in the vicinity of the TX/OK border. This feature 
then is expected to lift and break cyclonicly over the Ohio 
Valley. There could be substantial TROWAL associated precipitation
as this evolves - but as one might imagine, there is low 
predictability regarding exactly where and when this occurs. The 
expected timing for the leading edge of the precipitation is 
largely unchanged from the previous forecast ...primarily between 
Tuesday evening and Wednesday afternoon. ECMWF ensemble shows 
about a third of the members featuring accumulations greater than 
one inch during this time.

Ending time for rain will depend largely on how the TROWAL becomes 
oriented, but our best guess remains in the Wednesday 
afternoon/evening timeframe.

-- Dry weather Wed night into early Fri --

Surface high pressure will dominate much of the CONUS during this 
time with a mostly zonal polar jet around the Canadian border. 
However, the subtropical jet will be diffuse to non-existent and we 
may be dealing instead with a cutoff low over the southern Plains. 
We have kept slight chance to chance PoPs this weekend, which is 
more of a climatology-based prediction as one would expect when 
overall predictability is low. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 140 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The threat for thunderstorms does not extend as far east as
previously expected. MKG stands the best chance of all the 
terminals of encountering VCTS/TS, especially in the 03Z-06Z 
timeframe, but this is too small a probability to warrant 
specific mention in the TAF at this time.

Because the threat for precipitation in general has shifted 
westward, I removed any mention of precipitation for easternmost
terminals such as JXN and LAN.

No changes to our expectations regarding low level wind shear
impacting all our terminals overnight.


&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 337 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

No changes to the headlines. We have recently seen lakeshore winds 
veering more to the southeast. As noted previously this will limit 
wave growth, but speeds are appreciable with frequent gusts in the 
25-30 knot range expected.

&&

.GRR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MI...None.
LM...Small Craft Advisory until 6 PM EDT Monday for LMZ844>849.

&&

$$

DISCUSSION...TJT
AVIATION...TJT
MARINE...TJT
