FXUS63 KOAX 212306
AFDOAX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Omaha/Valley NE
606 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...Updated Aviation Forecast Discussion...

.DISCUSSION...
Issued at 400 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.Key Messages:

-A dynamic storm system is expected to reach the area Sunday
-Strong winds, record high temperatures, severe storms, and 
potentially dangerous fire weather are on the table

.Today and Saturday:

Largely zonal flow is featured in mid-level water vapor imagery this 
afternoon with a very dry airmass in place over the central CONUS. 
An arm of mid-level vorticity exists right along and north of the 
US/Canadian border and a outbound system exiting the East Coast 
leaves relatively little action in our neck of the woods. What we do 
have are abnormally warm and climbing temperatures  that have made 
it to the upper 70s area-wide, and will see a bump up to the low-to-
mid 80s Saturday afternoon. With these very warm temperatures and 
the general lack of a moist airmass, relative humidity values have 
fallen to upper-teens to low-20s and a similar outcome is expected 
tomorrow. Along with the dry airmass, winds out of the south will 
gust to 15-25 mph and make for very high fire danger where the 
lowest RHs occur (mainly in northwest into central Nebraska).

.Sunday and Monday:

By Sunday morning, the aforementioned arm of vorticity in Canada 
will have swung southward forming a quickly deepening trough 
centered over the Rockies. The deep nature of this system is 
expected to aid in the development of very strong wind fields 
throughout the vertical profile and increase the amount of 
moisture return from the Gulf of Mexico. Wind gusts out of the 
south at 40 to 50 mph continue to be a high likelihood Sunday 
afternoon, with EPS members indicating that we could see some 
locations that push those speeds by 5-10 mph where the strongest 
winds occur. With as dry as we have been, areas of blowing dust 
seem to be possible especially with recently harvested fields in 
the area.

Severe storms are also an increasing possibility, with strong 
shear profiles and hodographs with a good amount of low-level 
backing indicating that while winds continue to be the primary 
hazard, hail and an isolated tornado can't be ruled out. Between 
the various deterministic solutions, the ECMWF seems to be the 
most plausible scenario where an initial capping inversion is 
mixed out and a skinny surface-based CAPE profile exists. The main
question is the extent to which storms can form along the front 
as pushes of increased moisture occur Sunday late-afternoon and 
early evening. Storm activity looks most likely beginning at 3 PM 
and will continue to be possible into the early evening in the 
local area, after which they move northeast towards Minnesota. 

In addition to the strong winds on Sunday, a dry slot of air is 
forecast behind the main front where warm temperatures and a dry 
post-frontal airmass will allow for relative humidity values to drop 
below 25 percent for portions of northeast Nebraska into the central 
portion of the state. Very high to extreme fire danger will be 
possible Sunday afternoon. High temperatures Sunday are also 
forecast to break records as the climb to the upper 80s at 
KOMA/KLNK/KOFK.

Monday will see a much cooler day with continued winds that will 
gradually diminish over the course of the day. Any lingering storms 
would only affect far southeast Nebraska and southwest Iowa, though 
chances are greater to the south and east. 
 
.Tuesday through Friday:

Tuesday through Friday will continue feature an amplified pattern as 
Sunday/Monday's system splits in two with the shortwave portion 
ejecting northeast and a deeper trough ingests tropical energy and 
continues south and east of the forecast area with another deep 
system on its way late next week. Though we may see glancing blows 
from the precipitation associated with either system, the main 
event for each system will avoid the area favoring tracks to the 
southeast. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 604 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR conditions are expected throughout the TAF period with a few
passing high clouds. Otherwise, light and variable winds overnight
will gradually increase and become southerly after sunrise on
Saturday. Sustained winds on Saturday should remain around
10-15kts with a few gusts up toward 20kts by afternoon.

&&

.OAX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NE...None.
IA...None.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Petersen
AVIATION...Kern
