FXUS63 KLBF 212320
AFDLBF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service North Platte NE
620 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...UPDATED AVIATION FORECAST DISCUSSION...

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Saturday night)
Issued at 247 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Forecast concerns focus on continued fire weather concerns through 
the weekend with a strong storm system bringing strong winds and 
precipitation chances to the area Sunday into Monday. Details 
pertaining to fire weather concerns will be covered in the Fire 
Weather discussion below.

Fairly zonal flow remained in place across much of the central CONUS 
with a steady stream of moisture being noted within the vicinity of 
a strong upper-level jet moving ashore the PacNW. At the surface, 
elongated high pressure was situated along and east of the 
Appalachian spine with a strong surface low and associated surface 
boundary backing into our northern forecast zones. This boundary, 
denoted by a modest uptick in surface dew points, will gradually 
stall out and lift back north as a warm front by late tonight. 
Increased westerly winds behind a surface trough will keep the 
boundary layer from decoupling and lead to mild overnight 
temperatures as values only fall into the low 40s south to upper 40s 
north.

The aforementioned upper-level jet will begin to dig as an upper-
level trough takes shape over the northern Rockies through the day 
Saturday. As upper-level divergence increases invof northern 
Wyoming, a strong surface low will take shape over the Northern 
Plains. With responding low-level flow, winds will likely increase 
as a result particularly northwest of an Ogallala to Ainsworth line. 
Given continued westerly flow through much of the day, did boost 
daytime highs on Saturday with h85 and h7 temperatures pushing the 
90th percentile and greater via NAEFS climatology. Forecast highs 
range from the upper 70s to middle 80s west to east or 15 to 25 degF 
above normal with west to southwesterly winds gusting up to 35
mph.

.LONG TERM...(Sunday through Friday)
Issued at 247 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Approaching trough will begin to phase with southern stream jet by 
early Sunday. As strong height falls overspread the Central and 
Northern Plains within the left exit region of the 100+ knot upper-
level jet, expect rapid cyclogenesis to develop across much of 
northeast Colorado/western Nebraska/western South Dakota. NWP 
guidance is in good agreement pegging a ~985 hPa surface low near 
KFMM, lifting east-northeast across the forecast area during the 
afternoon hours. Current spreads in low pressure centers in ensemble 
guidance remain fairly low with less than 1 sigma values through the 
daytime. Given expected track, will see a regime of strong CAA 
across our northwest coincident with a crashing cold front and WAA 
across our eastern zones though the strongest signal looks to remain 
east of the area. This will play a large role in forecast high 
temperatures as highs ahead of the front should remain at well-above 
normal temperatures but cooler (more seasonable) behind. Latest 
trends have been to slow down progression of the frontal boundary 
leading to an overarching upward trend for afternoon highs. Even so, 
large spreads between the NBM 25th/75th percentile values for highs 
(~10-15 degF) within the CAA regime so consider this fairly low 
confidence for now. For now, have highs ranging from the low 60s 
northwest to middle 80s nearer central Nebraska. Given the strong 
low pressure and resultant pressure gradient, will need to watch for 
strong gradient winds across the area. Trends over the past 24 hours 
have been to decrease peak speeds, likely due to progression of the 
surface low with low center lifting north into South Dakota by 
Sunday evening. Given large spreads denoted by large NBM standard 
deviation values of 5-8 knots, will opt to keep inherited winds as 
is given decreasing trend over past few days.

Precipitation chances will increase late Sunday afternoon into early 
Monday as the surface low moves through the region. This activity 
will be largely driven by mid-level CVA and low-level fgen, largely 
around h85-h7. Top-down saturation will delay onset somewhat but 
expect precipitation to begin reaching the surface by late afternoon 
across our northwest. Forecast soundings show adequate mid-level 
saturation with thermal profiles supporting at least a brief 
rain/snow mix Monday morning across the western Sandhills with only 
rain expected elsewhere. At this time, not expecting much for snow 
accumulations owing to the transient nature of the activity, 
marginal surface temperatures, and warm sub-surface temperatures. 
Can't rule out some slushy accumulations on area roads for the 
Monday morning drive but overall thinking any accumulations will be 
limited to elevated surfaces with most snow melting as daytime highs 
climb above the freezing mark under partly cloudy skies.

A second, deep trough will track out of the Southern Plains and into 
the Middle Mississippi River valley in the Tuesday/Wednesday 
timeframe. Latest guidance keeps the majority if not all 
precipitation associated with this feature well south and east of 
the local area. Lingering northwesterly flow will be the biggest 
local impact which should prolong more seasonable temperatures for 
early next week (highs in the 50s to low 60s degF). Mid-week will 
see the area in the wake of the departing trough to the east as the 
next trough takes shape across the PacNW. This will translate to 
zonal and gradually to southwesterly flow aloft by Thursday/Friday. 
Additional low-end precipitation chances will accompany this as 
pattern with Slight Chance (< 25%) PoPs in the forecast for Thursday 
and Friday. Model blend guidance doesn't hint at much for 
precipitation EPS/GEFS each showing less than half their total 
members depicting precipitation and mean QPF values generally less 
than a half inch. Greater QPF amounts will reside southeast of the 
area but substantial trends will need to occur to see this potential 
reach into western Nebraska.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 620 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR conditions are expected to prevail through tomorrow evening.
LLWS development is anticipated for terminals north of Interstate
80 overnight, with flow aloft strengthening from the west. 
Otherwise, surface winds remain southerly through the period, with
gusts of 20 to 30kts possible through tomorrow afternoon.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 247 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Fire weather concerns will continue through the late afternoon 
Friday for Fire Weather Zone 204 (Panhandle/Crescent Lake). A weak 
surface low will take shape across western South Dakota, tracking 
east along I-90 this evening into early Saturday. This will help 
keep the pressure gradient across the area fairly compact and 
translate to poor humidity recovery night with sustained west-
southwest winds in the 5 to 15 mph range and gusts closer to 20 to 25 
mph. Westerly winds will fetch a plume of drier air, pushing dew 
points into the low 20s and maximum overnight humidity values 
generally in the 40 to 50 percent range.

For Saturday...have opted to hoist a Fire Weather Watch for the our 
northwestern zones. Westerly winds will continue to prevail for much 
of the daytime hours before gradually backing to the southwest by 
late afternoon. Given continued downsloping flow and anomalous h85 
and h7 temperatures, will again see afternoon highs push into the 
upper 70s to middle 80s or roughly 15 to 25 degrees above normal for 
late October. Afternoon humidity minimums will fall into the low 
teens across the entire forecast area, with various NWP guidance 
suggesting even this may be conservative. Forecast soundings show 
mixing heights approaching 3km, tapping into a belt of stronger 
westerly flow between h85 and h7 (~2-3km off the surface). Efficient 
momentum transfers will push these stronger wind gusts to the 
surface with areas north of I-80 and west of Highway 83 likely 
seeing the highest gusts nearing 30 mph. This thinking is supported 
by seeing gusts of around 30 mph even from the lower percentile 
groups of the model blend. As a stronger surface low takes shape to 
the north by late in the day, expect increasing southerly winds to 
envelope the area. Moisture fetch with these winds will likely be 
negligible so expect little improvement with humidity recovery due to 
elevated winds heading into Sunday.

For Sunday...strong surface low will mature across western 
Nebraska/northeast Colorado through the morning. This will promote 
strong winds across the area as kinematic response to the deepening 
system and constricting pressure gradient will yield strong 
southwesterly flow across our southern zones. The big question that 
lingers will be progression of the crashing cold front through the 
day. Latest forecast calls for this front to generally split the 
forecast area by mid-afternoon, with ample heating within strong 
southwesterly flow ahead of this feature. Probabilities of wind 
gusts exceeding 40 mph are highest south of the Platte River Valley 
with afternoon highs likely reaching the low to mid 80s once again. 
The current forecast combination of low humidity and strong winds 
warranting fire headlines is limited to our far south (Zone 219, 
possibly southern 209/210). Any south or east trend with placement 
of surface low track would effectively limit the threat locally so 
confidence is low to medium at best for now. Given the strong winds 
and general lack of precipitation expected, will still need to 
monitor the threat for elevated to near-critical fire weather 
concerns even within the cooler post-frontal airmass.

&&

.LBF WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Red Flag Warning until 7 PM CDT this evening for NEZ204.

Fire Weather Watch from Saturday afternoon through Saturday 
evening for NEZ204-206-208.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...NMJ
LONG TERM...NMJ
AVIATION...Brown
FIRE WEATHER...NMJ
