FXUS65 KGJT 212334
AFDGJT

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Grand Junction CO
534 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SHORT TERM...(Tonight through Sunday night)
Issued at 400 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

The western slope is currently being squeezed between high
pressure to the south and a strong low pressure trough over the
Pacific Northwest. This is resulting in a tightened gradient with
breezy west winds across much of the region as winds are gusting
in the 30s. Relative humidity is in the low to mid teens with
critical fire weather conditions at times across northwest
Colorado valleys. Therefore, the Red Flag Warning for northwest
Colorado valleys remains in effect. The gradient will shift to the
southwest as the Pacific Northwest trough moves over the
Intermountain West and deepens across the northern Great Basin.
This will allow the polar jet associated with this PacNW trough to
lay across northeast Utah and northwest Colorado while the
subtropical jet associated with the southern high to edge
northward across southwest Colorado. This tightened gradient
caused by the clashing of these air masses will result in deep
mixing and widespread windy conditions. The potential is
increasing for strong winds to reach many valley floors with winds
gusting in the 45 to 55 mph range, with highest winds across the
southeast Utah to northwest Colorado corridor. Therefore, decided
to issue a Wind Advisory for most lower valleys of east-central to
southeast Utah and western Colorado from late Saturday morning
through late Saturday evening. Winds will continue to blow after
dark and maybe into the early morning hours on Sunday across the
Four Corners region but any gusts above 40 kts should subside and
be localized at that point. 

These strong winds are all ahead of a strong cold front set to
drop temperatures some 20 degrees from Saturday's highs.
Widespread showers and thunderstorms also look to develop Saturday
evening, spreading across much of the area by Sunday morning and
continuing through late Sunday evening. Temperatures should be
warm enough that lower elevations would see rain with this event,
but the mountains have high potential to see significant snowfall
accumulation for our first big winter-like storm of the year.
The winds will remain strong at the higher elevations with gusts
50 to 60 mph as this trough moves through. CAPE is on the low end
but remains elevated enough in the 200 J/kg range with strong
frontogenesis and sufficient lift to raise potential for snow
squalls. Due to the early season nature and strong winds, decided
to issue Winter Storm Watches for the eastern Uintas and western
Colorado mountains from 9 pm MDT Saturday through 6 am MDT Monday.
Amounts and expected rates have consistently been in the advisory
range with 7 to 14 inches possible but the wind impacts and early
season nature could warrant warnings in some areas. Therefore, the
Winter Storm Watch will offer that flexibility to the mid shift to
decide what direction to lean. Cold air comes pouring in Sunday
night behind this system with widespread below freezing temps.
Some lower elevations look to hit hard freeze if they haven't
already but the fertile crescent of the southeast Utah to the
Grand Valley may have to wait until Monday night before hitting
their hard freeze. It's coming though...

.LONG TERM...(Monday through Friday)
Issued at 400 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

By Monday, the trough axis will have pushed through the CWA, leaving 
us under north/westerly flow.  Expect lingering precipitation, in 
the form of scattered snow showers, across the typical areas (mainly 
along the Continental Divide) on Monday morning and afternoon. 
Adequate moisture and some lift appears to remain in play over the 
area eastern half of the CWA through mid-day on Monday.  The CAPE 
that did exist in the short term periods is no longer present in the 
cold sector of the low, however.  As such, only expecting a light 
dusting to a few tenths of an inch of additional snowfall on Monday 
morning.  Flow turns predominately westerly on Tuesday as another 
upper level low begins diving south through the Pacific Northwest. 
It then pushes into the Great Basin by Wednesday morning and spreads 
precipitation through the northern half of the forecast area by 
Wednesday evening.  With a potentially similar track and duration to 
the first trough (throughout the short term), subsidence looks to 
move in by Friday morning.  All told, it looks like several new 
inches of snow in the high country (snow levels generally bobbing 
between 5 and 7 thousand feet) out of 1/10 to 1/2 inch of QPF, 
depending on elevation.

At any rate, temperatures will certainly remain below what we have 
been seeing...likely around 5 to 15 degrees below normal...through 
the long term forecast.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 534 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR conditions are expected to prevail over the next 24 hours.
Winds will be the biggest concern to aviation with LLWS developing
in some valley areas overnight. These strong winds aloft will mix
down to the valley floors with heating of the day. Most of not all
TAF sites will see gusts over 25 mph with some gusts in the 40 to
50 mph range during the peak heating part of Saturday. 

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 400 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Pressure gradients will tighten overhead as the region becomes
sandwiched between a broad ridge of high pressure to the south 
and lower heights over the northwest Continental U.S. Increased 
winds overhead will start mixing to the surface this afternoon, as
diurnal heating is maximized. Critical fire weather conditions 
are expected to continue over northwest Colorado due to high winds 
and minimum RH levels bottoming out in the low to mid teens. No 
changes have been made with current highlights, therefore, a Red 
Flag Warning remains in effect for Colorado fire weather zones 200
and 202 through 7 pm MDT this evening. Localized conditions are 
also possible across northern and central zones.

For the weekend into early next week, expect gusty winds to spread
across the entire region Saturday ahead of the approaching storm.
However, humidities will increase to non-critical thresholds.
Widespread rain and snow are expected beginning Saturday night 
and continuing into early next week with snow levels reaching some
of the higher valley floors with significant accumulations 
expected in the mountains. Temperatures will cool drastically 
behind the system. This will limit fire weather concerns.

&&

.GJT WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CO...Red Flag Warning until 7 PM MDT this evening for COZ200-202.

     Wind Advisory from 10 AM to 10 PM MDT Saturday for COZ001-002.

     Winter Storm Watch from Saturday evening through late Sunday 
     night for COZ004-009-010-012-013-018-019.

     Wind Advisory from noon to 10 PM MDT Saturday for COZ006>008-011-
     014.

     Wind Advisory from 10 AM Saturday to midnight MDT Saturday night 
     for COZ020-021.

UT...Winter Storm Watch from Saturday evening through late Sunday 
     night for UTZ023.

     Wind Advisory from 10 AM Saturday to midnight MDT Saturday night 
     for UTZ022-027-029.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...MDA
LONG TERM...SS
AVIATION...TGJT
FIRE WEATHER...TGJT
