FXAK69 PAFG 212354
AFDAFG

Northern Alaska Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Fairbanks AK
354 PM AKDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...

Light snow will continue in the Central and Eastern Interior through
the night Friday night, with less than an inch of additional 
accumulation expected. Areas from Eielson AFB to Delta Junction 
may see up to another 2 inches of accumulation. A few snow showers with
some areas of blowing snow are expected along the Arctic Coast 
through tonight. A pair of systems will bring more rain and snow 
to the whole West Coast Sunday, pushing inland to the Western 
Interior on Monday and Tuesday, though accumulations are expected
to be light. A strong low pressure system will move to the Yukon 
Delta on Tuesday, bringing strong winds and possible blizzard 
conditions to the Yukon Delta. Temperatures over northern Alaska
will be on a cooling trend through next week.

&&

.DISCUSSION...

Aloft...At 500 mb, troughing extends east over the West Coast and
Western Interior from an area of upper level low pressure over
eastern Siberia. A 5440 meter high lies 650 miles northwest of
Utqiagvik, and a 5340 meter high lies over Eagle. A 5320 meter low
will move to the Gulf of Alaska late Saturday night, and flow over
Mainland Alaska becomes weak and westerly. Weak ridging will build
into the Western Interior Sunday afternoon ahead of a 5200 meter
low over the Bering Strait. This low will move north to the
Chukchi Sea by Monday afternoon as flow slackens even more over
the Central and Eastern Interior.

Surface...A 1030 mb high lies 700 miles north of Kaktovik, a 996
mb low lies in the Gulf of Anadyr, with low pressure over the
Yukon Territory, weak high pressure over Interior Alaska, and a
weak trough of low pressure over the North Slope. A 1002 mb low 
will move to St. Lawrence Island by Saturday afternoon, then to
the Bering Strait Sunday morning. A second low will move to the 
Bering Strait at 1000 mb Sunday morning, then to Point Hope at 
1002 mb by Monday morning. A 983 mb low will move to the Gulf of
Alaska on Saturday night. Weak high pressure will persist over
Interior Alaska.

Models and Analysis...The 21/12z and 21/18z model suite
initialized well when compared to surface and upper air
observations. Weak ridging over the Eastern Interior is 10 to 20
meters stronger than models initialized. Because of this, we will
linger higher PoPs for snow in the Central Interior a bit longer
than model consensus before it pushes east. Models are in good
agreement on the strength and placement of major features aloft
through Sunday. For this forecast package, we'll use a blend of
models for all forecast elements, with a slight lean toward the
Canadian for winds to better capture higher winds over the Arctic
Coast and use high resolution guidance to capture winds in terrain as
best we can.

North Slope and Brooks Range...Winds along the coast will remain
east at 15 to 20 mph as high pressure persists over the eastern
Beaufort Sea. Winds in the Brooks Range and on the North Slope
will generally be light and southerly. A few snow showers with
some areas of blowing snow are expected along the coast through
tonight. Temperatures will be on a cooling trend with highs 
mostly in the teens by Monday, except in the 20s along the coast. 
Lows will be mostly in the single digits above and below zero by 
Tuesday morning.

West Coast and Western Interior...Southwest winds will produce elevated 
surf 1 to 2 feet above the normal high tide line through Saturday
morning. Rain and snow showers will continue through Saturday,
with mostly rain expected near the coast. A pair of systems will 
bring more rain and snow to the whole West Coast Sunday, pushing
inland to the Western Interior on Monday and Tuesday.
Precipitation will mostly fall as snow in the Western Interior,
but accumulations are expected to be 2 inches or less. Winds will
be mostly light inland and 20 mph or less along the coast.
Temperatures will be on a cooling trend through next week.

Central and Eastern Interior...Light snow will continue through the 
night Friday night, with less than an inch of additional 
accumulation expected. Areas from Eielson AFB to Delta Junction 
may see up to another 2 inches of accumulation. Snow will taper 
off by Saturday morning. Some scattered snow showers are expected
northwest of Fairbanks Saturday, and light snow with less than an
inch of accumulation is expected from Fairbanks to the Alcan
Border on Sunday. Monday will be mainly dry. Temperatures will be
on a cooling trend with highs mostly in the low to mid 20s by
Monday and lows in the teens and single digits.

Coastal Hazard Potential Days 3 and 4...A strong low pressure
system will move to the Yukon Delta on Tuesday. This will bring
strong winds to the West Coast from Nome south. At this time, the
track of the storm looks to bring mainly offshore winds and not a
widespread threat for coastal flooding. The area with the highest
chance of seeing coastal flooding from this storm is the Yukon
Delta. This storm will continue to be monitored.

Extended Forecast For Days 4 Through 7...A strong low pressure
system will move to the Yukon Delta on Tuesday. This will bring
the possibility of blizzard conditions to the Yukon Delta and 
heavy snow to the Western Interior south of Galena and Norton 
Sound. Temperatures will continue to cool as cold Arctic air 
settles over most of Mainland Alaska, with Winter taking a
stronghold through the extended period. 

&&

.AFG WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AK...None.
PK...Small Craft Advisory for PKZ230.
     Small Craft Advisory for PKZ235-240-245.
     Heavy Freezing Spray Warning for PKZ235.
     Heavy Freezing Spray Warning for PKZ240-245.
&&

JC
$$
