FXAK67 PAJK 220004
AFDAJK

Southeast Alaska Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Juneau AK
404 PM AKDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SHORT TERM...Satellite imagery and surface analysis show
dissipating trough along the coast with open cell cumulus moves
ESE across the gulf. This will maintain low end precipitation
chances into this evening before they diminish N to S. Expect
sky cover to decrease in a similar pattern allowing for some
fog development overnight into Sat. Still expect fair weather to
prevail Saturday with no precip, seasonal temps and more sunshine.
This will be brief however as the next low moves across the gulf
and Sat night into Sun with precip chances and winds increasing
across the region. 

.LONG TERM...

The two primary focuses of the long term are cooler temperatures 
and the possibility of multiple systems which have the potential 
to impact the panhandle.

A brief break in the weather through much of Saturday will rapidly
change as another system begins moving into the panhandle. 
Operational guidance is in good agreement on pre-existing zonal 
flow transitioning back into a more trough - ridge oriented 
pattern aloft, which will provide the upper level support for a 
low which will race E out of the Aleutians. Ensembles are leaning 
more towards the system impacting the S and central panhandle, but
the possibility of the low taking a more N track cannot be 
discounted entirely just yet. Wherever the low does end up, the 
potential for strong winds across much of the S and central half 
of the area does exist. Guidance and Ensemble consensus alike is 
in agreement that the low, regardless of its exact track, will be 
a fast mover, and given the lack of a strong plume of moisture 
associated with it, do not believe any significant flooding 
potential exists at this time with respect to this system. 
Anticipate strong winds and breezy conditions across much of the 
panhandle, though at this time, think that the worst of any such 
conditions will likely be focused along the outer gulf coast and 
the S and central panhandle. At this time, no significant snow 
accumulations are anticipated with this system, though will 
continue to monitor the potential for areas at elevation to see 
some snow - especially if temperatures aloft prove cooler than 
progged. A few parts of the Icy Strait Corridor may also see a few
snowflakes with this system should snow melt cooling prove 
sufficient, but this is looking increasingly unlike as vertical 
integration in the lower levels of the system should discourage 
formidable precipitation rates in this part of the panhandle.
Consequently, do not anticipate snow accumulation issues near sea
level.

In the wake of this system's departure early in the week, anticipate 
cooling temperatures, especially for the N half of the area, and the 
possibility of another system moving through the area late on
Monday and into Tuesday, mainly through the S half of the
panhandle. At this time, this system is not anticipated to bring
significant rainfall totals to to SE AK.

Ensembles have largely locked on to the idea of a strong low in 
the gulf towards the second half of next week, and operational
guidance has begun to indicate the likely presence of complex 
multi- wave system associated with it. The opening move for this
system will likely be the advance of a frontal band through the
panhandle during the latter half of Tuesday onwards, bringing with
it a renewed surge of rain and the possibility of strong winds
across the panhandle. A chance of a brief period of a rain snow 
mix, or even snow, may be possible for parts of the N half of the 
panhandle with this system, though conditions still look to be on 
the marginal side for anything more than possible minor snow 
accumulations in a few areas. This wave will then be absorbed into
a low pressure racing E out of the S Bering which will deepen 
after it enters the gulf. Beyond this time frame, guidance and 
ensembles alike diverge, but the consensus is that there will be
some respectable rain totals and the possibility of substantial 
winds depending on the exact track the system takes. River rises 
are likely with this system, and as confidence grows in the
forecast track, closer attention will need to be paid to the
potential for areas of flooding. Cannot rule out the possibility
that some areas could see snow near sea level for a period of 
time with this system as well, but given that it is still a 
significant ways away, uncertainty remains high. This system will 
need to be closely monitored, and further updates will be made as 
forecast confidence increases.

&&

.AVIATION...Widespread VFR conditions with a few pockets of MVFR
conditions are ongoing across the panhandle this afternoon.
Tonight, sky cover is expected to decrease along with any
remaining shower activity. Fog will form through the inner
channels and over some portions of the panhandle where skies are
able to efficiently clear. Areas that see fog, could fall to IFR
conditions late tonight with some areas falling to LIFR if fog
become dense. Saturday, any fog that forms will mix out by
afternoon making way for widespread VFR conditions. 

&&

.AJK WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
PUBLIC...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory for PKZ022-041>043-051>053. 

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...BC
LONG TERM....GFS
AVIATION...CC

Visit us at http://www.weather.gov/Juneau
