FXUS61 KGYX 212329 AAA
AFDGYX

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Gray ME
729 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure provides dry weather and ample sunshine for
Saturday after a chilly night. It will be abnormally warm 
with relatively light winds. Low pressure moving northward 
along the Eastern Seaboard will bring increasing cloudiness on 
Sunday, with rain likely to move into the area that evening and 
overnight. Unsettled, but warm conditions prevail for much of 
the coming work week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 7 AM SATURDAY MORNING/...
Update...Minor changes to reflect latest observational trends.

Previous discussion...High pressure will remain overhead 
tonight. With clear skies and light winds, expect some 
radiational cooling especially away from the coast. Have gone 
below most available guidance for overnight low temperatures. 
Have fore temperatures near or below the freezing point from the
mountains to portions of southern interior sections of Maine 
and New Hampshire. However, the frost and freeze programs have 
ended for all portions of the region.

Low surface dew point values can be expected overnight. Despite
a dry atmosphere in place, expect the possibility for a few of
the deeper valleys to product some patchy fog during the late
night hours.

&&

.SHORT TERM /7 AM SATURDAY MORNING THROUGH SATURDAY NIGHT/...
High pressure will remain in place off the Atlantic coast and
extending into New England to start out the weekend. The
moderating trend will continue. Under sunny skies and H8
readings over around +10C, expected high temperatures in the 60s
in all areas with a few communities in southern New Hampshire
nudging 70 degrees.

It will be dry with relative humidity values in the 30s to mid
40s. Have leaned towards the lower solutions in terms of surface
dew point values.

With high pressure and relatively dry conditions remaining in
the region, will continue the theme of large diurnal ranges. Low
temperatures Saturday night will drop into the 30s to lower 40s.
A few locations may once again have patchy fog despite this dry
layer.

&&

.LONG TERM /SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Overview:  High pressure will move northeastward of our area towards 
the Canadian Maritimes ahead of an approaching warm front to our 
south on Sunday. This front will bring our next potential for 
rainfall across the region with locally heavy rainfall 
possible, especially along the coast. Showery weather will then 
likely continue through the mid-week period as a warm, moist 
airmass lingers. High pressure will gradually build back in for 
the end of the week, allowing for a drier and cooler airmass to 
return. 

Impacts:  Locally heavy rainfall is possible late Sunday through 
Monday as a warm front lifts northward and interacts with a very 
warm, moist airmass.  

Forecast Details: Surface high pressure will move off to the 
northeast of the region on Sunday ahead of an approaching warm front 
from the south. The position of the high will allow for an 
increasingly strong onshore flow during the day, which will push dew 
points into the 50s across much of the region. In addition, clouds 
will gradually increase from south to north during the day and there 
could be a shower late in the day, especially across southern NH and 
coastal southwestern ME. Despite a moistening of the low-levels, 
forecast soundings indicate that there will be quite a bit of dry 
air at the mid-upper levels, which may push back the start time to 
these showers across more northern areas. 

The front will continue to push northward on Sunday night and into 
Monday as an inverted trough begins to take shape across the
area and low pressure develops along the advancing frontal
boundary. These are notoriously difficult for models to handle 
but there will be the potential for locally heavy rainfall, 
especially along the coast as we tap into sub- tropical air. The
latest ECMWF ensemble suite indicates the potential for PWATS 
to increase to between 1.00- 1.50" on Sunday night through 
Monday, which is near the maximum moving average for the date. 
Current indications are for between 0.50-1.00" of rain across 
the foothills and points south with locally over 1.00" towards 
the coast. Across the far north, rainfall amounts will be much 
lighter due to the aforementioned dry air with generally a
quarter inch or less expected.

This front will gradually exit the region later on Monday but a very 
warm, muggy airmass for late October will persist through much of 
the week. While there will likely be many dry breaks mixed in 
between, some showery weather may persist through mid- week 
before a cold front crosses towards the end of the week bringing
a drier airmass and more seasonable temperatures. Overnight fog
will also be likely each night due to weak flow and small dew 
point depressions.

&&

.AVIATION /00Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
Short Term...Mainly VFR conditions in the near term, however 
there could be some patchy fog overnight in the deepest valleys.
However, with plenty of dry air in place, this should be
relatively limited. VFR conditions remain for Saturday and
Saturday night with some patchy late night fog possible once
again.

Long Term...A warm front will lift northward late Sunday through
Monday, which will bring widespread SHRA/-RA to TAF sites south
of the mountains. There will also be the potential for some LLWS
during this timeframe. Further to the north, mainly dry
conditions are currently expected. This front will exit the 
region later on Monday, but some patchy BR/FG may develop later
on Monday night. Mainly VFR conditions are then likely through 
the middle of the week, although some FG will be possible each 
night.

&&

.MARINE...
Short Term...Winds and seas have subsided from earlier this
morning when SCAs headlines were in effect. Expect southwesterly
winds to continue for the near and short term portion of the
forecast, but below SCA thresholds.

Long Term...A warm front and area of low pressure will move
northeastward on Sunday through Monday, bringing onshore flow
but winds and seas will likely remain below SCA levels. Showers
and isolated rumbles of thunder will be possible as this front
crosses. There remains uncertainty in the forecast beyond Monday
but current indications are for mainly dry conditions along with
a non-zero chance for a few scattered showers.

&&

.GYX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
ME...None.
NH...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$

NEAR TERM...Legro
