FXHW60 PHFO 232008
AFDHFO

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Honolulu HI
1008 AM HST Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A typical trade wind weather pattern is expected over the next few
days thanks to high pressure north of the area. Clouds and passing
showers will favor windward and mauka locations. An upper trough
is forecast to move over the area later in the week allowing for a
wetter trade wind weather pattern to set up. 

&&

.DISCUSSION...
At the surface, high pressure is centered far northeast of the 
state. Aloft, a ridge of high pressure lies over the area. The 
result is a somewhat stable trade wind weather pattern with 
inversion heights currently at between 6000 and 7000 feet. 
Moisture embedded in the trades is providing for some passing 
showers over windward and mauka locations with most leeward 
locations remaining dry. 

Over the next few days, the surface high will build westward
keeping trade winds in the moderate to breezy range. Meanwhile,
the upper ridge will drift westward but will continue to be close
enough to keep our airmass on the stable side. Showers will
continue to favor windward and mauka areas and be highly dependent
on incoming moisture availability. 

By Thursday, an upper trough will dig down over the area from the
north. Meanwhile a frontal boundary far to our north will weaken 
the low level pressure gradient across the area. This will cause 
trade winds to drop into the light to locally moderate range. The
upper trough will help destabilize the airmass allowing for 
greater shower chances across the state especially for windward 
and mauka areas. The upper trough is forecast to linger over the 
area into Saturday. The airmass may become unstable enough to 
allow for a few thunderstorms to form primarily over the Big 
Island and possibly Maui slopes mainly during the afternoon and 
evening hours. 

&&

.AVIATION...
High pressure building far northeast of the state will bring 
moderate to locally breezy easterly trades to the region for the 
next several days. Expect scattered showers mainly over windward 
areas with dry conditions prevailing elsewhere. Brief MVFR 
conditions may occur with showers.

No AIRMETs are currently in effect or expected through Monday.

&&

.MARINE...
Large areas of high pressure positioning themselves northeast of 
the state will be the main drivers for several days of moderate to
locally strong trades across the islands. A Small Craft Advisory 
(SCA) is in effect for those notoriously windier eastern island
bays, channels and waters south of Big Island. High pressure from
the west will fill in northeast of the islands and merge with the
current high cell. This will tighten the pressure gradient over 
and upstream of the islands and support more fresh to locally 
strong trades through the middle of the week. Thus, the SCA will 
likely be in effect through the majority of the week and may even 
need to be expanded in areal coverage.

Small north and south swell are both diminishing today. A low 
pressure system northwest of the region will slowly drift further
north away from the local waters the next few days. Gale winds 
along this low's northern periphery will generate a series of 
northwest swinging to north swells that will reach the islands 
through mid week. These swells will keep surf from going 
completely flat and maintain small north-facing surf into late 
week. Generally background, medium period south swell will hold 
small south-facing shore surf through the week. The arrival of a 
slightly larger, longer period south swell may provide a minor 
bump to south surf heights later in the week. Strengthened trade 
winds will produce more elevated and choppy surf along east-facing
shores.

&&

.HFO WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Small Craft Advisory until 6 PM HST Monday for Maalaea Bay-
Pailolo Channel-Alenuihaha Channel-Big Island Leeward Waters-Big 
Island Southeast Waters.

&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Burke 
AVIATION...TS 
MARINE...Blood
