FXUS63 KGLD 232112
AFDGLD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Goodland KS
312 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday)
Issued at 255 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

For the short term, strong winds will continue this afternoon until 
a front moves through in a few hours. Then cooler weather with gusty 
winds are expected for tomorrow.

Current observations show the cold front entering northwestern Yuma 
county with a few echoes on radar. With dry air near the surface, it 
is doubtful that rain is reaching the ground though light rain may 
be possible this evening before the front moves further south. Winds 
are still strong with most of the area seeing gusts of 40-55 mph 
from the southwest with an occasional gust to 60 mph. Blowing dust 
was reported across the area, but the plume out of Eastern Colorado 
has dispersed so visibilities are improving to 6 miles or more 
across most of the CWA. Gove and Graham counties continue to see 
blowing dust from a plum in SW Kansas. This will likely continue 
until the front moves through this evening. Guidance continues to 
show the front moving through the area from 00-03Z (6-9pm MDT). 
Winds are not forecasted to strengthen that much with the front 
through pressure rises suggest that sustained winds around 30-35mph 
with gusts up to 45 mph will be possible. These values are lower 
than what was observed through the day as the beginning of the 
inversion and the surface low moving through will lower winds before 
the front increases them. By the late evening, all of the wind and 
dust threats should be over with the fire threat continuing to 
diminish. Lows tonight will drop into the 30's and 40's in spite of 
winds remaining near 15-20mph and some cloud cover as cold air 
advects in from the north.

Tomorrow, much cooler and breezy with highs in the 50's and winds 
gusting 25-30 mph. The cut-off low that developed in the upper level 
flow will help determine if some cloud cover lingers over the 
southeastern part of the area depending on how much it digs south. 
The further south it digs or the faster it moves to the east, the 
front and moisture will move further away from the area. If it 
doesn't move too far, than there is the potential for moisture to 
remain in the mid levels and keep cloud cover over the southeastern 
portion of the area. If the cloud cover does remain, temperatures 
may max out closer to 50. Otherwise, dry conditions are expected to 
remain across the area.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Sunday)
Issued at 306 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

At the beginning of the long term period, model guidance shows an 
upper air low over eastern OK giving the CWA a northwesterly flow 
aloft. Models depict the low moving eastward throughout Tuesday 
turning the upper air flow for the CWA to a westerly direction being 
under the base of a large upper air trough. On Wednesday, forecast 
guidance has the CWA gaining a more west-southwesterly flow as the 
trough reorients itself by taking a positive tilt and having its 
base near the ID/UT/WY border by the night hours. On Thursday 
morning, the CWA looks to be underneath an inflection point in the 
upper air flow with and have a more southwesterly flow with the base 
of the trough moving closer to the Four Corners region. By Thursday 
evening, models start to diverge in their solutions dealing with the 
trough progress as the GFS has the trough base over TX with the 
ECMWF's trough trailing it a bit over NM. On Friday, the GFS shows
the CWA under a weak ridge trailing a now closed low moving into 
the southeastern CONUS. As an alternative, the ECMWF also shows 
the closed low that stays over northern TX slowly moving east 
through Friday. The model solution differences continue as the GFS
shows the CWA getting a northwesterly flow aloft being under the 
front part of a western trough on Saturday with the axis of the 
trough finally reaching over the CWA by Sunday night. The ECMWF 
shows the upper air low over eastern OK throughout Saturday giving
a northerly flow aloft to the CWA that becomes west-southwesterly
late Sunday as the low moves northeast away from the CWA. As 
there is quite a discrepancy between long term models particularly
in the latter few days, future runs will be monitored for better 
agreement.

At the surface, the CWA sees signs of elevated to near critical fire 
weather conditions continue on Tuesday and Wednesday. Minimum RH 
values down to the middle teens and wind max wind gusts close to 25 
kts on Tuesday afternoon while Wednesday sees minimum RH values down 
to the upper teens with max wind gusts up to around 30 kts during 
the afternoon. Will continue to monitor this in case these 
conditions worsen. On Thursday, a surface low pressure looks to move 
eastward from southern CO into southern KS. This placement may allow 
for chances for precipitation throughout day that mostly looks to be 
light rain with some possible light snow overnight in portions of 
eastern CO. Forecast QPF values look to be minimal at best at this 
time. Precipitation chances look move out of the area early Friday 
with the remainder of the forecast period staying dry. 

The Tri-State area looks to see daytime high temperatures on Tuesday 
in the lower to middle 60s followed by highs on Wednesday in the 
upper 50s to middle 60s. Thursday's highs look to be in the lower 
50s to middle 60s with Friday's highs ranging between to the middle 
50s and lower 60s. High temperatures for Saturday expect to be in 
the upper 50s to middle 60s followed by Sunday having highs in the 
lower to middle 60s. Overnight lows on Tuesday range between the 
lower and middle 30s with Wednesday night's lows between the lower 
30s and lower 40s. Thursday night lows cool to the middle 20s to 
middle 30s followed by Friday's overnight lows being between the 
middle 20s and lower 30s. The remainder of the long term period sees 
lows in the upper 20s to middle 30s.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1057 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

For KGLD... MVFR conditions are expected for the first few hours
of the period due to blowing dust. A plume of dust was located
about 10-15 miles northwest of the terminal with visibility around
2SM and ceilings around 2000ft. Satellite observations show the
plume advancing north of the terminal. However, the advancement of
a surface low will help push the stronger winds and dust into the
terminal which will lower visibility and ceilings over the
terminal. Currently not expecting conditions to be as worse as
current observations as winds should lessen and broaden going into
the afternoon which is why MVFR conditions are forecasted. There
could be intermittent VFR conditions during this time. As the
afternoon continues, the dust is forecasted to spread out which
will improve visibility and ceilings back to VFR. The next concern
will then be an advancing cold front around which will rapidly 
change the wind direction to out of the north and strengthen winds
for an hour or two around 02Z. Winds will then lessen through the
night and remain from the north.

For KMCK... MVFR conditions are expected to start the TAF period
as dust from a plume to the southwest moves over the terminal.
This will persist for a few hours before dispersing to the
southeast as the surface low system moves into the area. Reduced
visibility will still be likely through the early evening hours
until the cold front moves through. The front will move through
around 01-02Z, rapidly changing wind direction to out of the north
and strengthening winds for a few hours. Winds will then lighten
and remain roughly from the northwest.


&&

.GLD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
KS...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for KSZ001>004-
     013>016-027>029-041-042.

     Blowing Dust Advisory until 8 PM MDT this evening for KSZ029.

CO...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for COZ252>254.

NE...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for NEZ079>081.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...KAK
LONG TERM...076
AVIATION...KAK
