FXUS63 KGLD 231709
AFDGLD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Goodland KS
1109 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1015 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Blowing dust is currently reducing visibilities to 1.75SM in
Burlington within a narrow plume. GFS 0.5-1km wind speeds of at
least 45kts are advertised in this area currently, in line with
local research findings for high impact blowing dust/dust storm
events. Historically over the past year or two, GFS model has
handled these events the best. 

For the remainder of the day, this area of favored wind speeds
continues for Dundy, Hitchcock, Cheyenne KS and CO, Rawlins,
Sherman and Kit Carson counties. So, would expect additional
plumes to develop and impact these counties. With that in mind,
I've gone ahead and issued a Blowing Dust Advisory. 

Will be watching areas from Hill City to Oakley and Tribune south
as well where visibilities to the south of our area already
reduced in blowing dust. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Tuesday)
Issued at 332 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Southwesterly flow aloft today as the upper-level trough approaches 
the region. Strong winds out of the southwest 30-40 mph sustained, 
gusting 45-55 mph and minimum RH in the 15-20% range result in 
critical to extremely critical fire weather. In addition to the 
dangerous fire weather, blowing dust is likely to develop by mid to 
late morning, reducing visibilities and air quality. Highest winds 
and also greatest blowing dust concerns are expected over eastern 
Colorado and locations south of I-70 where localized gusts up to 55 
mph are possible. Afternoon highs will be in the 70s west to near 90 
degrees over the east. Timing of cold front passage continues to be 
around sunset into a few hours following. With FROPA, expect a wind 
shift to the northwest and far northwestern portions of the area to 
see a slight chance for rain showers. Overnight lows fall into the 
30s to mid-40s.

Winds aloft continue southwesterly into Monday before the upper-
trough axis moves through Monday evening/night. Northerly surface 
winds remain somewhat breezy into the afternoon with gusts up to the 
mid-30s (mph) possible. Elevated fire weather conditions possible 
despite minimum RH values in the upper-teens to low-20s. Afternoon 
highs will be in the 50s to near 60. Overnight lows fall into the 
20s to mid-30s.

On Tuesday, flow aloft is out of the northwest to west as the upper-
low continues east. Wind gusts could reach 25-30 mph in the 
afternoon, and with minimum RH in the 15-20% range, again could be 
looking at elevated to near-critical fire weather concerns. 
Afternoon highs climb into the 60s. 

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday night through Saturday)
Issued at 339 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The westerly flow aloft Tuesday night turns southwesterly on
Wednesday and Wednesday night as an upper trough moves through the
Intermountain west and into the central Rockies. High pressure at
the surface extends southward from the northern Plains into the
southern Plains Tuesday night and moves over the eastern Plains on
Wednesday as a lee trough deepens along the Front Range in
response to the westerly flow over the Rockies and the approaching
upper trough. Dry and breezy conditions continue through Wednesday
with a potential for elevated fire weather conditions Wednesday
afternoon.

By Wednesday night, the surface trough deepens into a closed low 
over southeast Colorado and southwest Kansas that moves into the 
southern High Plains with the upper trough moving over the High 
Plains by late Thursday. The upper trough continues eastward over 
the Plains states between Thursday night and Friday with a slight 
chance of light rain across the forecast area and a few flurries
possible over the western sections of the forecast area where 
temperatures dip below freezing as the main upper trough moves 
across the region. Surface high pressure moves into the forecast 
area with short wave ridging moving over the Rockies and High 
Plains by Friday. Friday night into Saturday model solutions lack 
consistency, but generally show west to southwest flow aloft over 
the central High Plains region with another lee surface trough 
beginning to develop.

Seasonable temperatures are expected trough the long term period
with highs in the middle 50s to middle 60s and lows in the upper
20s and 30s.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1057 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

For KGLD... MVFR conditions are expected for the first few hours
of the period due to blowing dust. A plume of dust was located
about 10-15 miles northwest of the terminal with visibility around
2SM and ceilings around 2000ft. Satellite observations show the
plume advancing north of the terminal. However, the advancement of
a surface low will help push the stronger winds and dust into the
terminal which will lower visibility and ceilings over the
terminal. Currently not expecting conditions to be as worse as
current observations as winds should lessen and broaden going into
the afternoon which is why MVFR conditions are forecasted. There
could be intermittent VFR conditions during this time. As the
afternoon continues, the dust is forecasted to spread out which
will improve visibility and ceilings back to VFR. The next concern
will then be an advancing cold front around which will rapidly 
change the wind direction to out of the north and strengthen winds
for an hour or two around 02Z. Winds will then lessen through the
night and remain from the north.

For KMCK... MVFR conditions are expected to start the TAF period
as dust from a plume to the southwest moves over the terminal.
This will persist for a few hours before dispersing to the
southeast as the surface low system moves into the area. Reduced
visibility will still be likely through the early evening hours
until the cold front moves through. The front will move through
around 01-02Z, rapidly changing wind direction to out of the north
and strengthening winds for a few hours. Winds will then lighten
and remain roughly from the northwest.

&&

.GLD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
KS...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for KSZ001>004-
     013>016-027>029-041-042.

     Blowing Dust Advisory until 8 PM MDT this evening for KSZ001-002-
     013.

CO...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for COZ252>254.

     Blowing Dust Advisory until 8 PM MDT this evening for COZ091-092.

NE...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for NEZ079>081.

     Blowing Dust Advisory until 8 PM MDT this evening for NEZ079-080.

&&

$$

UPDATE...99
SHORT TERM...CC
LONG TERM...LOCKHART
AVIATION...KAK
