FXUS63 KGLD 232055
AFDGLD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Goodland KS
255 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday)
Issued at 255 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

For the short term, strong winds will continue this afternoon until 
a front moves through in a few hours. Then cooler weather with gusty 
winds are expected for tomorrow.

Current observations show the cold front entering northwestern Yuma 
county with a few echoes on radar. With dry air near the surface, it 
is doubtful that rain is reaching the ground though light rain may 
be possible this evening before the front moves further south. Winds 
are still strong with most of the area seeing gusts of 40-55 mph 
from the southwest with an occasional gust to 60 mph. Blowing dust 
was reported across the area, but the plume out of Eastern Colorado 
has dispersed so visibilities are improving to 6 miles or more 
across most of the CWA. Gove and Graham counties continue to see 
blowing dust from a plum in SW Kansas. This will likely continue 
until the front moves through this evening. Guidance continues to 
show the front moving through the area from 00-03Z (6-9pm MDT). 
Winds are not forecasted to strengthen that much with the front 
through pressure rises suggest that sustained winds around 30-35mph 
with gusts up to 45 mph will be possible. These values are lower 
than what was observed through the day as the beginning of the 
inversion and the surface low moving through will lower winds before 
the front increases them. By the late evening, all of the wind and 
dust threats should be over with the fire threat continuing to 
diminish. Lows tonight will drop into the 30's and 40's in spite of 
winds remaining near 15-20mph and some cloud cover as cold air 
advects in from the north.

Tomorrow, much cooler and breezy with highs in the 50's and winds 
gusting 25-30 mph. The cut-off low that developed in the upper level 
flow will help determine if some cloud cover lingers over the 
southeastern part of the area depending on how much it digs south. 
The further south it digs or the faster it moves to the east, the 
front and moisture will move further away from the area. If it 
doesn't move too far, than there is the potential for moisture to 
remain in the mid levels and keep cloud cover over the southeastern 
portion of the area. If the cloud cover does remain, temperatures 
may max out closer to 50. Otherwise, dry conditions are expected to 
remain across the area.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday night through Saturday)
Issued at 339 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The westerly flow aloft Tuesday night turns southwesterly on
Wednesday and Wednesday night as an upper trough moves through the
Intermountain west and into the central Rockies. High pressure at
the surface extends southward from the northern Plains into the
southern Plains Tuesday night and moves over the eastern Plains on
Wednesday as a lee trough deepens along the Front Range in
response to the westerly flow over the Rockies and the approaching
upper trough. Dry and breezy conditions continue through Wednesday
with a potential for elevated fire weather conditions Wednesday
afternoon.

By Wednesday night, the surface trough deepens into a closed low 
over southeast Colorado and southwest Kansas that moves into the 
southern High Plains with the upper trough moving over the High 
Plains by late Thursday. The upper trough continues eastward over 
the Plains states between Thursday night and Friday with a slight 
chance of light rain across the forecast area and a few flurries
possible over the western sections of the forecast area where 
temperatures dip below freezing as the main upper trough moves 
across the region. Surface high pressure moves into the forecast 
area with short wave ridging moving over the Rockies and High 
Plains by Friday. Friday night into Saturday model solutions lack 
consistency, but generally show west to southwest flow aloft over 
the central High Plains region with another lee surface trough 
beginning to develop.

Seasonable temperatures are expected trough the long term period
with highs in the middle 50s to middle 60s and lows in the upper
20s and 30s.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1057 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

For KGLD... MVFR conditions are expected for the first few hours
of the period due to blowing dust. A plume of dust was located
about 10-15 miles northwest of the terminal with visibility around
2SM and ceilings around 2000ft. Satellite observations show the
plume advancing north of the terminal. However, the advancement of
a surface low will help push the stronger winds and dust into the
terminal which will lower visibility and ceilings over the
terminal. Currently not expecting conditions to be as worse as
current observations as winds should lessen and broaden going into
the afternoon which is why MVFR conditions are forecasted. There
could be intermittent VFR conditions during this time. As the
afternoon continues, the dust is forecasted to spread out which
will improve visibility and ceilings back to VFR. The next concern
will then be an advancing cold front around which will rapidly 
change the wind direction to out of the north and strengthen winds
for an hour or two around 02Z. Winds will then lessen through the
night and remain from the north.

For KMCK... MVFR conditions are expected to start the TAF period
as dust from a plume to the southwest moves over the terminal.
This will persist for a few hours before dispersing to the
southeast as the surface low system moves into the area. Reduced
visibility will still be likely through the early evening hours
until the cold front moves through. The front will move through
around 01-02Z, rapidly changing wind direction to out of the north
and strengthening winds for a few hours. Winds will then lighten
and remain roughly from the northwest.


&&

.GLD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
KS...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for KSZ001>004-
     013>016-027>029-041-042.

     Blowing Dust Advisory until 8 PM MDT this evening for KSZ029.

CO...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for COZ252>254.

NE...Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for NEZ079>081.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...KAK
LONG TERM...LOCKHART
AVIATION...KAK
