FXUS61 KCTP 231807
AFDCTP

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service State College PA
207 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A disturbance in the western Atlantic may linger close enough to
the coast, so that occasional light rain affects the Susquehanna
Valley to start the new work week. However, for most of the
region, it will stay rain free and mild. 

Towards the middle of the week, a slowly approaching frontal
system from the west, could bring more widespread showers.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
2 pm update... Late this afternoon, satellite imagery showed
that thicker low to mid-level cloudiness has advanced about as
far inland as areas just to the east of the I-99 corridor.
Farther west, just patchy high and thin cloudiness still
prevails. Meanwhile, any light rain reaching the surface 
appears to be relegated to far southeastern PA and the Delmarva 
region.

Overnight, we don't expect a great deal of change in this
pattern, as there will be a tight low-level moisture gradient
from west to east across the Commonwealth. Areas of light rain
may occasionally make a run at the Susquehanna Valley, the
western Poconos, and the Endless Mountains region. However, we
don't expect any rainfall west of these areas. 

As for sky cover, we think clouds will have the upper hand east
of the I-99 corridor, with clear-partly cloudy conditions
farther west. Across the Alleghenies and northwestern PA, less
cloudiness will allow more radiational cooling, so lows in these
locales should drop down into the 30s. Farther east, more 
clouds will hold minimum temperatures in the 40s to near 50 
degrees. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
215 pm update... In general, model guidance has shifted a bit
westward with the moisture supply tied to the western Atlantic
surface wave and upper-level trough to start the week. As a
result, it is within the realm of possibilities that light rain
or drizzle could periodically impact areas near and east of
about US-15 from Monday through Tuesday. Even in these locales,
though, any rain should be light, and there will be significant
rain free periods. From about the I-99 corridor westward, it 
seems quite unlikely that any rainfall, or even thicker cloud 
cover, will impact the region.

Given an overall pattern favoring rising heights over the
eastern CONUS, downstream of a deep central CONUS trough axis,
temperatures are likely to stay above climatology for late
October. Thus, look for daily highs in the 60s-lower 70s, while
overnight lows only drop into the 40s and lower 50s for most
areas. 

By Wednesday, the slow approach of a surface frontal complex out
ahead of the previously mentioned central CONUS upper trough,
could well bring more widespread showers to the Commonwealth.  

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SATURDAY/...
A weakening shortwave and associated cold front is progged to 
push through the region Wednesday PM, likely accompanied by 
scattered showers. Ensemble plumes indicate most likely rainfall
from this feature of between 0.1 and 0.2 inches. Fair and mild 
weather looks probable Thursday, as high pressure builds in 
behind the front. 

Increasing model spread/forecast uncertainty develops late in 
the forecast regarding timing of approaching southern stream 
shortwave. It looks like there will be a stretch of dry weather
through at least Saturday evening. Moisture begins to creep into
the southwestern regions Saturday night/Sunday morning, but
there still remains a high degree of uncertainty with the timing
and placement of this moisture. The Euro is more progressive
than the GFS with the trough and arrival of moisture. All things
considered, it looks like scattered rain showers are possible 
starting on Sunday.

Temperatures throughout the long-term will cool off a little bit
compared to previous warm weeks with highs in the 50s and 60s,
but this will still be a few degrees above average for this time
of year. Low temperatures in the long-term will stay rather mild
as we close out October, with temperatures staying well above
the freezing mark.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
For the 18Z TAF set, a change in thinking. This based on low
off the southeast VA coast spreading lower clouds to the west.

Observations, Satellite, and models now support the idea
of the lower clouds to the east working westward this afternoon
into Monday. This will be especially the case east of the
mountains. The least likely area to get the lower CIGS will
be BFD.

For later Monday, conditions should improve a bit. However
the far southeast could linger in lower clouds into Tuesday.

Outlook...

Tue...A wide range in conditions. Eastern areas could be
MVFR and even IFR, while clear skies prevail to the west.

Wed...Mainly VFR with ISOLD/SCT SHRA, mainly NW.

Thu...MVFR cigs poss NW, VFR elsewhere.

&&

.EQUIPMENT...
Parts are on order for the KJST visibility sensor.

Scheduled maintenance on many regional ASOS sites will occur 
over the next few weeks. Interruptions to mainly the wind sensor
data, but, at times, much of the observation data, can be 
expected.

&&

.CTP WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Jurewicz
NEAR TERM...Jurewicz
SHORT TERM...Jurewicz
LONG TERM...Fitzgerald/Buvala
AVIATION...Martin
EQUIPMENT...
