FXUS61 KPHI 231935
AFDPHI

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Mount Holly NJ
335 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Low pressure will gradually lift northward near the coast 
through Monday before gradually weakening as it tracks by our 
area. Weak high pressure returns for Tuesday, then a cold front 
is forecast to move through later Wednesday. High pressure then 
builds to our north Thursday through Saturday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
Coastal low which we have been watching and waiting to see
develop has finally come to fruition. This low is currently
centered southeast of Cape Hatteras, and will slowly but surely
move northward tonight and Monday. The system will weaken as it
does so, such that we will see maximum rain coverage tonight,
before the low center arrives, but it now looks likely that some
rain and drizzle will persist into at least Monday morning if
not all day Monday given the slow movement of the system, which
will not have cleared the area completely as of late Monday
afternoon, lingering near the NJ shore at that point. 

The developing onshore flow will result in increasing
coverage of occasional rain and drizzle thru the rest of the
afternoon into this evening, and there is a little embedded
instability, so can't completely rule out an isolated
thunderstorm near the coast at some point, but not confident
enough to include in the forecast just yet. Because of the
persistent northeast flow, expect temps to mostly remain steady,
in the 50s to lower 60s, thru tonight with only a modest rise
under the clouds on Monday. With a lot of uncertainty in exactly
where the surface low ends up Monday, there remains a lot of
uncertainty in exactly where rain bands will set up, but
definite potential for intervals of rain and drizzle to linger
much of the day in some places. Even where it dries out, expect
the moist marine flow to keep low clouds around, so minimal
sunshine if any is expected Monday. All that said, the day
should end drier and milder than how it starts. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY NIGHT/...
An upper-level trough lifting up the East Coast is forecast to 
continue to weaken. While an initial surface low may track near 
our coastline Monday evening, it overall should continue to 
weaken and perhaps even dissipate as a main surface low is well 
offshore. The presence of this weakness should result in plenty 
of lower clouds within an onshore flow. It will tend to get more
humid through this time frame as the surface dew points climb 
into the low to perhaps mid 60s across much of the region.

Regarding precipitation chances, we kept the PoPs below likely 
given high uncertainty with the coverage and intensity of any 
rain. Looks like while it could be showery at times, overall 
went with a light rain mention. This system should be battling 
drier air to the west, so that could result in our far western 
areas getting less rain although the model guidance trend 
overall has shifting westward some. The overall theme for this 
time frame is plenty of cloud cover with the potential for some 
light rain or drizzle at times. A fog mention was also added for
both Monday night and Tuesday night given increasing dew points
and also the potential for lowering ceilings. Temperatures will
depend on the exact extent of the cloud cover (low stratus 
versus higher cloud bases) given the onshore flow. Kept the 
forecast rather cloudy through Tuesday with some more 
improvements during Wednesday.

As we go through Wednesday, an upper-level trough is forecast 
to take on some negative tilt as it lifts across the eastern 
Great Lakes and vicinity. Surface low pressure will accompany 
this and track to our north, however a cold front will move 
through later in the day Wednesday or at night. It should be on 
the humid side ahead of the front Wednesday as dew points are in
the lower 60s for many areas. Deeper moisture however may be 
more limited and with the bulk of the lift potentially just 
glancing our area, precipitation could be on the sparse side. As
a result, PoPs were kept in the slight chance to low chance 
range.

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
Summary...Temperatures on the milder side Thursday followed by 
some gradual cooling through the weekend. May have to watch for 
a system approaching from the southwest late in the weekend.

Synoptic Overview...As a negative tilt upper-level trough 
shifts well to our north to start Thursday, the flow turns more 
zonal through Friday. A strong upper-level trough, that may 
close off, then tracks across the southern states to end the 
week. This feature should then gradually shift east and 
northeastward through the weekend. At the surface, sprawling 
high pressure is forecast to build across the Great Lakes region
then into the Northeast Thursday and Friday (a secondary cold 
front may move through later Thursday). This high then gradually
slides off the New England coast late in the weekend. Low 
pressure is forecast to be tracking up the Tennessee Valley and 
vicinity Sunday.

For Thursday...As a negative tilt upper-level trough lifts well
to our north to start this day, the flow aloft then becomes 
flatter (more zonal). Sprawling surface high pressure centered 
over the upper Great Lakes will build eastward, however a 
secondary but dry cold front looks to cross our area later in 
the day. This front will help to step down our temperatures and 
also lower the dew points. As a result, it will be cooler at 
night although not all that cold.

For Friday and Saturday...The overall pattern suggests that a 
bit of ridging is across the Northeast which supports sprawling 
surface high pressure building across to our north. It looks 
more like a winter type pattern with the surface high becoming 
centered near Maine early Saturday, which then wedges 
southwestward (cold air damming scenario). Meanwhile, energy 
sliding across the Gulf coast states should support low pressure
along a frontal zone. For our region, a northeasterly low-level
flow is forecast to be in place thanks to strong high pressure 
to our north. This should result in cooling along with 
potentially more cloudiness from off the ocean. There is 
uncertain with the details as some low-level moisture may try to
produce a few showers on the southern periphery of the surface 
high within the onshore flow regime. The influence of the 
surface high though should win out overall, therefore went with 
more of a drier forecast and a bit more sunshine.

For Sunday...An upper-level trough is forecast to be tracking 
up the Tennessee Valley and vicinity, supporting surface low 
pressure across the Southeast states. The low should then 
generally track northward. As this occurs, surface high pressure
is forecast to be gradually shifting off the New England coast 
however probably still wedging itself down into the Mid-
Atlantic. Our sensible weather will be partially driven by the 
surface high centered to our north to northeast, but also with 
the trough and surface low features approaching from the west 
and south. The timing and strength of these features is less 
certain at this time range, but eventually some wet weather may 
overspread our region. Temperatures may end up very close to 
average.

&&

.AVIATION /19Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
The following discussion is for KPHL, KPNE, KTTN, KABE, KRDG, 
KILG, KMIV, KACY and surrounding areas.

Rest of today and tonight...Conditions dropping to MVFR to IFR
most terminals with rain and drizzle. Best conditions will 
remain KRDG where cigs will struggle to drop as rain will 
struggle to reach this far west. Worst conditions KACY where 
already down to IFR and can easily reach LIFR or possibly VLIFR 
(mainly cigs). Winds northeast to north 5-10 kts occasional 
gusts to 15 kts, highest gusts KACY. High confidence on overall
pattern, moderate on exact details.

Monday...Low pressure pulling away and weakening should allow 
slow improvement. Expect cigs and vsby to gradually improve as 
rain and drizzle dwindle, but IFR to LIFR in the AM (especially 
KACY) may struggle to rise to VFR, with MVFR more likely to 
persist during the afternoon. May even have some intervals of 
IFR during the afternoon, especially cigs. Moderate confidence 
on overall pattern, low confidence on details.

Outlook...

Monday night and Tuesday...Sub-VFR ceilings overall with the 
chance for some light rain or drizzle. Some fog is also possible
Monday night into Tuesday morning. North-northeast winds 5 
knots or less, becoming east to southeast Tuesday. Low 
confidence.

Wednesday...Sub-VFR conditions possible in the morning due to 
low clouds and fog, otherwise improving to VFR overall. Some 
showers are possible however mostly in the afternoon and at 
night. Light and variable winds becoming southeast to south less
than 10 knots, then becoming west to northwest 5 knots or less 
at night. Low confidence.

Thursday and Friday...VFR. Northwest winds 5-10 knots, becoming
northeast Friday. Moderate confidence.

&&

.MARINE...
Low pressure moving northward along the coast will bring SCA
gusts, possibly approaching borderline gales, over the ocean
waters tonight, with lower but still SCA gusts on the bay. Seas
will also build to 5-8 ft on the ocean. As the low pulls
northward and weakens on Monday, winds should quickly subside to
sub-SCA, but waves will be much slower to drop, so SCA continues
all day on the ocean. 

Outlook...

Monday night...The seas are expected to continue to subside, 
and therefore the conditions should be below Small Craft 
Advisory criteria.

Tuesday through Friday...The conditions are anticipated to be 
below Small Craft Advisory criteria.

&&

.PHI WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
PA...None.
NJ...None.
DE...None.
MD...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 10 PM EDT this evening for ANZ431.
     Small Craft Advisory until 6 PM EDT Monday for ANZ450>455.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Gorse
NEAR TERM...RCM
SHORT TERM...Gorse
LONG TERM...Gorse
AVIATION...Gorse/RCM
MARINE...Gorse/RCM
