FXUS61 KCTP 231710
AFDCTP

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service State College PA
110 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Low pressure will linger off of the east coast through early
this week, as a ridge of high pressure holds over Pennsylvania.
A weakening cold front is likely to push through the state late
Wednesday, then high pressure should build in from the Great 
Lakes to end the week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 PM THIS EVENING/...
1045 am update... Our current forecast is pretty well in hand,
so only a few cosmetic tweaks were made, based on the latest
observational data.

Late morning satellite and radar imagery showed Atlantic
moisture making a slow approach into the Commonwealth from the
east and southeast. The overall environment appears to be dry
enough across the forecast area (even the Susquehanna Valley 
and western Poconos) to keep most, if any rainfall from reaching
the ground this afternoon/early evening. The latest suite of
high resolution, near-term model guidance well supports this
thinking. We'll retain a very low chance (20-30%) of some patchy
light rain/drizzle over eastern Lancaster and Schuylkill
counties, but that's about it.

As for cloud cover, the thicker low to mid-level cloudiness may
ease into parts of the Susquehanna Valley with time, but areas
farther to the west should see filtered sunshine through some
high-level cloudiness. 

Temperatures will be fairly mild once again, ranging from near
70 this afternoon over northwestern PA, to the low-mid 60s in 
the higher terrain of the Alleghenies and western Poconos. As 
for surface dew points, we agree with the notion of the previous
shift that they will be lower than NBM guidance, due to a weak 
inversion and decent reservoir of dry air above this, as judged 
from the latest KPIT and KBUF ACARS soundings. 

Previous discussion... Nighttime cloud microphysics sat imagery
shows lower clouds beginning to develop over eastern PA as a 
weak coastal storm rides up the eastern seaboard. Most of 
central PA has seen clear skies thus far as cirrus attempting to
expand westward has dissipated in drier air. Although no fog 
has been observed yet, there could be some patchy valley fog in 
the deeper valleys of central PA by sunrise. 

The trend through the day will be for more clouds to develop  
as low level moisture increases across at least the eastern 
half of the area. The northern Alleghenies should see mostly 
sunny skies through the whole day. 

Latest guidance indicates the edge of rain associated with 
coastal low will remain just east of the forecast area, as it 
makes its closest pass to PA Sunday evening. Thus, will maintain
low POPs over only the eastern edge of the forecast area. 

Clouds and an easterly flow off of the Atlantic should hold 
temperatures down a bit today, especially across the eastern 
counties. Ensemble 2m temp plumes indicate highs are likely to 
be close to those of Saturday across the sunnier Alleghenies, 
and a few degrees cooler over the Susq Valley. In general, 
expect highs in the mid to upper 60s. Model soundings once again
show very dry air above a weak inversion, supporting 
undercutting NBM dewpoints in the afternoon over all but the 
Lower Susq Valley.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 PM THIS EVENING THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
Coastal low is progged to lift into New England late Sunday 
night, with clearing skies over central PA. A calm wind and 
clearing skies should promote patchy late night valley fog.

Mid level shortwave and associated easterly low level jet is
progged to lift north of the region by Monday, ending any
remaining chance of rain over eastern PA. However, lingering 
upper trough, combined with low level moisture, could result in 
lingering stratocu over the eastern edge of the forecast area 
both Monday and Tuesday. Elsewhere, fair and warm conditions are
expected under ridge axis, with patchy AM valley fog possible.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SATURDAY/...
A weakening shortwave and associated cold front is progged to 
push through the region Wednesday PM, likely accompanied by 
scattered showers. Ensemble plumes indicate most likely rainfall
from this feature of between 0.1 and 0.2 inches. Fair and mild 
weather looks probable Thursday, as high pressure builds in 
behind the front. 

Increasing model spread/forecast uncertainty develops late in 
the forecast regarding timing of approaching southern stream 
shortwave. It looks like there will be a stretch of dry weather
through at least Saturday evening. Moisture begins to creep into
the southwestern regions Saturday night/Sunday morning, but
there still remains a high degree of uncertainty with the timing
and placement of this moisture. The Euro is more progressive
than the GFS with the trough and arrival of moisture. All things
considered, it looks like scattered rain showers are possible 
starting on Sunday.

Temperatures throughout the long-term will cool off a little bit
compared to previous warm weeks with highs in the 50s and 60s,
but this will still be a few degrees above average for this time
of year. Low temperatures in the long-term will stay rather mild
as we close out October, with temperatures staying well above
the freezing mark.

&&

.AVIATION /17Z SUNDAY THROUGH THURSDAY/...
For the 18Z TAF set, a change in thinking. This based on low
off the southeast VA coast spreading lower clouds to the west.

Observations, Satellite, and models now support the idea
of the lower clouds to the east working westward this afternoon
into Monday. This will be espcially the case east of the
mountains. The least likely area to get the lower CIGS will
be BFD.

For later Monday, conditions should improve a bit. However
the far southeast could linger in lower clouds into Tuesday.

Outlook...

Tue...A wide range in conditions. Eastern areas could be
MVFR and even IFR, while clear skies prevail to the west.

Wed...Mainly VFR with ISOLD/SCT SHRA, mainly NW.

Thu...MVFR cigs poss NW, VFR elsewhere.

&&

.EQUIPMENT...
Parts are on order for the KJST visibility sensor.

Scheduled maintenance on many regional ASOS sites will occur 
over the next few weeks. Interruptions to mainly the wind sensor
data, but, at times, much of the observation data, can be 
expected.

&&

.CTP WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Fitzgerald/Colbert
NEAR TERM...Jurewicz/Fitzgerald/Colbert
SHORT TERM...Fitzgerald/Colbert
LONG TERM...Fitzgerald/Buvala
AVIATION...Martin
EQUIPMENT...
