FXUS63 KFGF 212325
AFDFGF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Grand Forks ND
625 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 621 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Widely scattered showers continue to trek close to the
international border this evening. A few sites have reported rain,
although dry air appears to be significantly limiting any rainfall
accumulations. Expect the trend of increasing cloud cover and
scattered light rain showers across the international border to
continue this evening.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Saturday night)
Issued at 340 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Weather related impacts are not anticipated this afternoon through 
Saturday evening. Generally quiet weather prevails, with increasing 
cloud cover, and continued mild temperatures. Look for an increased 
chance for mainly light rain along and north of the Highway 200 
corridor tonight into Saturday morning. 

For Saturday, temperatures climb into the 50s along the 
International Border, to near 70 degrees in the southern Red River 
Valley. A dry forecast is in store through the afternoon and into 
the early evening before we see rain chances increase once more 
through the overnight. 

.LONG TERM...(Sunday through Friday)
Issued at 340 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

In summary, our warm trend will disappear after Sunday, when a cold 
front drops temperatures back towards normal. Showers and possibly 
thunderstorms will start the extended period, and there is little 
chance of impacts from winter weather.

A trough is going to dig into the area to start the long term 
period. This trough will bring in precipitation chances starting 
early Sunday morning in our far western areas. Time period for the 
heaviest precipitation will be Sunday into Monday, with the Devils 
Lake Basin and Turtle Mountain areas looking to receive the most. 
Probabilities for QPF exceeding 0.5" are around 55% in those areas 
into Monday afternoon. Unfortunate that rain chances will be high, 
as highs on Sunday will be warmer than normal. Expect 50s in the 
Devils Lake Basin, with 70s possible in areas along the SD border 
and in west-central Minnesota.

Monday night, we will see precipitation move to the east out of our 
area. As it does, temperatures will drop into the 20s and 30s. If 
the timing is just right, some areas in the Devils Lake Basin have a 
good chance of seeing a dusting of snow. Chances remain very low for 
anything more (Probabilities of >1" are around 10%), so impacts will 
be low. 

The remainder of the work week has a cooler airmass in place, with 
highs in the 40s and lows in the 20s and 30s through the end of the 
week. Zonal flow aloft after the trough will allow shortwaves to 
move through, but confidence on impacts from these disturbances is 
low due to how far out the chances are in our ensemble guidance.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 621 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR cigs will prevail through the TAF period with generally light
winds. Initially, winds will be variable in direction but should
settle on northeasterly tomorrow afternoon. Aviation impacts will
be very low over the TAF period. Some RA may make it to DVL this
evening although confidence is too low to add a TEMPO or 
prevailing group at this time.

&&

.FGF WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
ND...None.
MN...None.
&&

$$

UPDATE...Perroux
SHORT TERM...Lynch
LONG TERM...AK
AVIATION...Perroux
