FXUS62 KMHX 220054
AFDMHX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Newport/Morehead City NC
854 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure will continue to ridge into the area into Saturday.
Weak low off the Southeast coast will then bring unsettled 
weather to the area later Saturday through the rest of the weekend
High pressure builds in from the west early next week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM SATURDAY MORNING/...
As of 840 PM Fri...Most inland areas are already seeing calm
winds early this evening, with scattered cloud cover across most
of ENC, but overcast stratus along the Crystal Coast. Still
expect most efficient radiational cooling to be across inland
areas, but any locations that remain clear for several hours
tonight could cool quickly with very shallow ground fog
possible. 

Previous Discussion...Inland surface ridge axis shifts a bit 
further west tonight, to near the Blue Ridge, allowing low level
moisture to increase modestly along the coast through the 
night. Precip will mainly be focused where low level moisture 
convergence is strongest along the coastal trough axis, which is
expected to remain just off the coast, but a shower or two 
moving back over the Outer Banks is possible late. Scattered cu 
and strato-cu persist through the night, especially along and 
east of Hwy 17, which light winds and more favorable radiational
cooling conditions west of Hwy 17. Some shallow ground fog is 
also possible where radiation is most efficient inland, but 
coverage and impacts will be very limited.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM SATURDAY MORNING THROUGH 6 PM SATURDAY/...
As of 445 PM Fri...Weak surface low pressure becomes more well
defined off the Southeast coast Saturday, though the local
scenario will be slow to change, with low level/BL moisture
increases only marginal until later in the day. Likewise,
scattered low cloud cover in the morning will trend more 
overcast through the afternoon, especially near the coast, with
increasing cirrus as well. NE gradient brings moderate winds 
mainly along the coast, with temps very near normal.

&&

.LONG TERM /SATURDAY NIGHT THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 330 PM Friday...Coastal low impacts the area through the 
weekend, bringing unsettled weather into the region. High 
pressure ridges back in from the north early next week before a 
chance for some more unsettled weather returns midweek.

Saturday Night and Sunday...Decent agreement across global 
model guidance shows a stacked coastal low off the Southeast US 
coastline slowly drifting northward along the Carolina coast 
late Saturday and eventually towards the DELMARVA coast by 
Sunday. Have slowed the inland spread of shower chances until
Saturday evening into overnight, peaking Sunday. Best chc for 
precip will remain along the immediate coastline with heaviest 
precip staying east of Hwy 17. OBX will likely see the bulk of 
the unsettled weather with gusty NNErly winds and persistent 
precip through the weekend. A weak CAD setup still expected to 
take hold Sunday to keep aftn temps cool, in addition to NNE 
flow, expected cloud coverage, and rain. 

Monday through Friday...Aforementioned coastal low will begin 
dissipating Monday into Tuesday, thought a few coastal showers 
cannot be completely ruled out as broad mid-level troughing 
lingers across the eastern seaboard. Models differ quite a bit 
at this point with the GFS showing another stacked low 
developing off the Southeastern US coastline by midweek and 
moving northward towards the Carolinas, but the ECMWF and 
Canadian both showing much weaker coastal development.

&&

.AVIATION /00Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
SHORT TERM /through Saturday/... 
As of 8 PM Fri...VFR generally prevails through the forecast 
period, with 5-6 kft ceilings mainly focused along and east of 
Hwy 17 this evening. The pattern remains relatively steady 
tonight with cooling likely lowering cloud decks, with some 
MVFR cigs possible overnight mainly immediately along and off 
the coast, possibly pushing as far west of EWN, though 
confidence is low in this occurring. Further west, mainly clear 
skies and light winds will once again bring about efficient 
radiational cooling. Shallow fog is once again possible late 
tonight into early Sat AM, but a slightly strong gradient an 
more regional cloud coverage makes the fog forecast very 
uncertain. Have opted to tempo IFR fog for several hours around 
sunrise only at PGV. Cloud cover slowly trends up Saturday, but 
mainly VFR still expected at least through early afternoon at 
all terminals. 

LONG TERM /Saturday Night through Wednesday/... 
As of 340 PM Friday...Sub-VFR conditions arrive Saturday 
late afternoon into evening across the coast and try to spread 
inland Saturday night into Sunday as a low pressure system 
develops off the NC coast. Eastern NC TAF sites may not fall 
below MVFR levels, but could see sub-MVFR conditions along the 
NC coast (MRH/HSE/MQI). Conditions will begin to improve on 
Monday and into Tuesday, though coastal terminals may have some 
lingering restrictions Monday morning.

&&

.MARINE...
SHORT TERM /Through Saturday/... 
As of 5 PM Fri...The NE gradually tightens tonight through 
Saturday as ridging persists inland and low pressure gradually 
develops off the Southeast coast. Winds reach 15-20 kt with 
gusts to 25 to 30 kt Saturday morning into early afternoon 
across the coastal waters and sounds, with SCAs in effect 
accordingly. Limited incoming swell keeps mainly 2-4 ft seas in 
place tonight, climbing gradually to 3-6 ft through the morning 
Saturday, with seas approaching 8 ft beyond 10 nm offshore later
Saturday in rough northerly windswell. 

LONG TERM /Saturday Night through Wednesday/... 
As of 345 PM Friday...Hazardous marine conditions continue
Saturday night as a coastal low moves northward towards the 
offshore Carolina waters. Winds peak overnight Saturday into 
early Sunday morning with N/NNE winds gusting 25-30 kts and seas
5-8 ft. Coastal low will depart northward late Sunday into 
Monday, gradually allowing marine conditions to drop below 
advisory criteria by Monday with a NNE wind around 10-15 kts and
seas 3-5 ft, which will continue into Tuesday.

&&

.MHX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NC...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory from 5 PM Saturday to 5 PM EDT Sunday for 
     AMZ131-230-231.
     Small Craft Advisory from noon Saturday to 5 PM EDT Sunday for 
     AMZ135.
     Small Craft Advisory from 2 PM Saturday to 10 AM EDT Monday 
     for AMZ150.
     Small Craft Advisory from 8 AM Saturday to 5 PM EDT Monday for 
     AMZ152-154.
     Small Craft Advisory from 8 AM Saturday to 4 AM EDT Monday for 
     AMZ156-158.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...MHX
NEAR TERM...CB
SHORT TERM...CB
LONG TERM...MS/ML
AVIATION...CB/MS/ML
MARINE...CB/MS/ML
