FXUS62 KRAH 220059
AFDRAH

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Raleigh NC
858 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure will extend into the area through Saturday. A coastal 
low and surface trough will approach late Saturday night and Sunday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
As of 858 PM Friday...

Water vapor imagery this evening depicted a mid/upper trough axis 
centered along the FL/GA/SC coastline. A developing mid-level low 
was also embedded within the base of the trough over central FL. 

At the surface, a 1021 mb high was centered off the New Jersey 
coast, extending calm and stable conditions down into central NC. 
Clear skies this evening will again promote good radiational cooling 
across much of our area, supporting lows in the mid 30s to low 40s. 
Locations across the southern Coastal Plain may see slightly warmer 
lows in the lower to mid 40s as scattered to broken stratus over the 
coast move westward overnight.  

No major changes were made this evening as the inhereted forecast is 
on track.   

&&

.SHORT TERM /SATURDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
As of 300 PM Friday...

A closed mid/upper-level low and accompanying surface reflection, 
just offshore the coast of FL and GA at 12Z Sat will drift slowly 
nnewd, offshore the South Atlantic coast through the day. An 
inverted trough/shear axis to the north of the low will pivot 
slightly wwd across the srn Mid Atlantic and allow an upper-level 
jet streak and accompanying plume of high-level moisture to arc wwd 
and through ern NC, including as far west as the Coastal Plain/I-95 
corridor during the afternoon-evening. High pressure will otherwise 
continue to extend swwd across the Mid Atlantic and interior 
Southeast. 

An area of stratocumulus over ern NC this afternoon will likely have 
spread wwd across portions of the Coastal Plain and ern Sandhills by 
Sat morning. Backing flow in that layer, from ely to nely with time, 
will then likely direct that moisture and stratocumulus swwd into 
SC. Associated partly to variably cloudy conditions, between that 
stratocumulus and the aforementioned plume of considerable high 
clouds, will result over the Coastal Plain, with mainly sunny 
conditions otherwise and elsewhere. Continued modification of the 
continental Polar surface ridge/airmass overhead will favor warming 
to near average temperatures in the upper 60s to mid 70s.  -MWS

A pattern shift begins on Saturday night into Sunday morning with 
mid-level closed low lifting north from off the FL/GA coast to the 
eastern Carolina coast by Sunday evening, all while transitioning 
into a open wave. Model guidance continues to show a weak surface 
wave pulling north along the east coast Saturday night into Sunday 
morning then leaving an inverted trough axis behind pinned to the 
Carolina coast through Sunday.

These features will work in tandem to increase moisture advection 
within the 1000-800mb layer, especially along and east of the I-95 
corridor during this time. The best chance for precipitation will 
likely be between 06-18z Sunday co-located with the maximum upper 
divergence spreads area. As well as weak isentropic ascent within 
the moisture layer. There still remains some uncertainty with the 
inland penetration of the surface low and related westward extent of 
the precipitation/cloud cover and resultant cooler surface 
temperatures. Deterministic/ensemble guidance does show anomalously 
high PWAT of 1-1.5 inches (125-175% above normal for late October) 
over the eastern half of NC during this time, increasing the 
likelihood of the removal of the dry, continental airmass that has 
been in place over the eastern CONUS. Overall, mostly drizzle is 
expected with little to no accumulations expected, although some 
accumulations of less than a tenth of an inch can not be completely 
ruled out. 

Temperatures will largely be dependent on the westward extent of the 
cloud shield and light rain during peak heating; locations under 
these conditions should struggle to get out of the mid 60s, while 
west of this area should remain fairly sunny and warm up will into 
low/mid 70s.  -Swiggett

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 300 PM Friday...

Ensemble guidance has started to come into better agreement with the 
evolution of the trough diving into the western US and strong ridge 
axis building over the Northeast. The strong ridge axis will remain 
slightly more tempered over the southeast by southern stream 
cyclonic flow leading to only slightly above normal H5 heights. At 
the surface, high pressure over the Northeast will nose down through 
the southern Appalachians Monday with an inverted trough axis along 
the Carolina coast. Increasing low-level moisture within the 
north/northeasterly flow will bring back the chance for more cloud 
cover and higher humidity, but no day is particularly favored for 
precipitation through Tuesday.

On Wednesday, a compact closed low over the central Plains 
approaches the southern Appalachians before pivoting north through 
the Ohio Valley and into the Lower Great Lakes by Thursday morning. 
A surface low will follow a similar path and bring the chance for a 
trailing cold front into the Mid-Atlantic Wednesday night into 
Thursday. Although, at this time range, confidence is low on 
precipitation chances with the front. 

Temperatures should be on a generally rising pattern with H5 heights 
rising through Wednesday as well as 1000-850mb thicknesses 
increasing by 5-15m each day. Expect highs/lows to be 5-10 degrees 
above average until some slight cooling beyond Wednesday.

&&

.AVIATION /00Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
As of 725 PM Friday... 

24 hour TAF period: High confidence VFR conditions will prevail 
through the 24 hour period. Winds should be calm to light and 
variable through the period. Increasing low-end VFR clouds in the 
3500-6000 ft range is expected from the east Saturday evening/night. 
Though not expected, if clouds become broken before 00Z Sun (highest 
chance at KRWI and KFAY) cigs should still be VFR. -KC

Looking ahead: Weak coastal low pressure will meander off the coast 
of the Carolinas and cause IFR-MVFR ceilings and areas of light rain 
and drizzle to spread inland and across the eastern half of NC Sat 
night-Sun, with the highest probability of occurrence in cntl NC at 
RWI, followed by RDU, and FAY. A prolonged period of moist, nely to 
ely low level flow will then result in periods of IFR-MVFR ceilings 
throughout cntl NC through early-mid next week. -MWS

&&

.RAH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Kren
NEAR TERM...Luchetti
SHORT TERM...MWS/Swiggett
LONG TERM...Swiggett
AVIATION...KC/MWS
