FXUS65 KREV 232121
AFDREV

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Reno NV
221 PM PDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...

We will see another widespread hard freeze tonight, before 
temperatures rebound closer to average Monday afternoon. 
Additional weaker weather systems may bring light showers and 
increased breezes late Tuesday into Wednesday and again next 
weekend, while temperatures generally remain below average.

&&

.SHORT TERM...through Monday night...

Most lower elevation sites reported sub-freezing temperatures
early this morning. For any location that managed to dodge this 
morning's freeze, it's virtually certain to occur tonight as clear
skies and light winds after a chilly afternoon promote more 
optimal conditions for radiational cooling. 

A band of light lake-enhanced snow showers occurred this morning 
south of Pyramid Lake, producing modest accumulations (up to 1") 
on Virginia Peak, but these showers have since diminished. The 
only precip potential in the short term will be occasional light 
showers near the Oregon border late Monday afternoon and Monday 
night as some warm advection moisture streams in ahead of the next
weak weather system arriving Tuesday-Wednesday.

Temperatures will have a chance to rebound closer to average in 
most areas on Monday with highs in the lower-mid 60s. Limited
mixing after morning inversions and/or increased cloud cover will
keep temperatures a few degrees cooler in far northeast CA, 
northwest and west central NV. MJD

.LONG TERM...

The next upstream low pressure system will bring slightly
increased breezes as well as increased chances for more snow to 
higher elevation Sierra locations and rain to lower western Nevada
areas Tuesday into Wednesday morning. Ensemble guidance still 
projects a more easterly tracking of a cold front that quickly 
drives east and south across NV. Enhanced QPF will be confined 
mostly on the windward side of the central Sierra crest southward 
where orographic lifting gives a boost to precipitation along 
those areas. Most precipitation will be shadowed across western NV
and leaves little in the way of any substantive precipitation for
areas east of the Sierra crest. But there is still a chance for 
some light showers over far western NV Tuesday afternoon through 
Wednesday morning. 

A sampling of blended guidance across the region shows at least a 
30% chance for precipitation from a few hundredths to a couple 
tenths for most areas across northeast CA, as well as far western NV 
and the eastern Sierra.  Snow level will fall from a 8000’ Tuesday 
afternoon to 5500’-6000’ with some higher Sierra locations picking 
up a couple inches to an much as 4” of newly accumulated snowfall. 
The areas over the Basin and Range will see little in the way of 
precipitation on Tuesday.  But Pershing and Churchill counties could 
pick up a couple a hundredths of an inch of much needed rainfall 
early morning Wednesday as a weak frontal wave forms over west- 
central NV overnight Tuesday and Wednesday morning. The West 
Humboldt, Stillwater, and the Clan Alpine mountains could see an 
inch or two of new snow added to their higher peaks by Wednesday 
morning.

Winds will be the other factor to consider with this next system as 
enhanced afternoon westerly breezes will bring gusts 20-30 mph 
across the region as the front quickly exits the region.  Lake Tahoe 
and Pyramid Lake could see choppy surface conditions with increased 
turbulence and brief periods of low level shear for aviation 
concerns Tuesday afternoon and evening. 

Temperatures will also take a dive 10-15 degrees below seasonal 
averages through the later half of next week. Overnight lows 
Thursday and Friday could drop below freezing for several hours for 
some lower valley areas of western NV as increased post-frontal 
northerly winds spread colder air into the region. A gradual warming 
trend to more seasonal values this weekend will precede another weak 
system looking to bring more unsettled conditions to the region.

-Amanda

&&

.AVIATION...

* Some low-level moisture retained around KTRK could cause one
  more occurrence of patchy freezing fog Monday morning between
  09-15Z. Otherwise VFR conditions will prevail for all terminal 
  the next couple days. A low pressure system quickly passing 
  through the region Tuesday and Wednesday may bring a chance for 
  some showers to Sierra terminals (KTRK-KTVL) with quick bursts 
  of MVFR conditions in lower ceilings and visibility.

* FL100 north-northeast winds 20-30 kts bringing periods of light
  turbulence over higher terrain areas along the Sierra crest into
  far western NV through 15Z Monday. Surface winds will be
  generally light less that 10 kts through this evening into 
  Monday morning. Monday will see lighter breezes from the west 
  gusting to 15-20 kts in the afternoon through early evening then
  tapering off after 02-04Z. Tuesday could see stronger breezes 
  to 30 kts and will as periods of turbulence for Sierra and far 
  western NV terminals. -Amanda


.REV Watches/Warnings/Advisories...
NV...None.
CA...None.
&&

$$
