FXUS65 KVEF 231644 AAA
AFDVEF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Las Vegas NV
944 AM PDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...Breezy north winds and cooler conditions today in the 
wake of the cold front. Dry for much of the area, with just some 
light precipitation possible in eastern Lincoln County. Calmer 
weather through Tuesday before a weaker system approaches on 
Wednesday.
&&

.UPDATE...Brisk start to our Sunday in wake of last nights cold 
front. In addition to the very strong winds, rain gauges along 
Interstate 15 in northeast Nevada and northwest Arizona reported 
between a 0.10" and 0.40". Pipe Spring N.M. further east in northern 
Mohave County reported 0.25". Morning visible satellite imagery also 
indicated some fresh snow cover on the peaks in Esmeralda and 
Lincoln Counties. 

Gusty northwest winds (20-30 mph) are forecast to continue through 
the day before starting to back off this evening. Current 
observations indicate snow falling at Cedar City and Milford Utah. 
Can not rule out some light snow showers in northern Lincoln County 
throughout the day as well before diminishing as the trough moves 
east. Quieter weather Monday weak high pressure move overhead.
Forecast is in good shape with not update necessary this morning.  

&&

.SHORT TERM...Today and Monday.

Well, this system certainly did not disappoint in the wind 
department. The Las Vegas Valley saw winds between 50-60 mph, with a 
fair share of blowing dust. The higher elevations in the CWA saw 
winds generally ranging from 65-80 mph, with Angel Peak taking the 
top spot at 82 mph! Fortunately, the strongest of winds are behind 
us with the cold front moving through overnight. In its wake, breezy 
north winds and notably cooler temperatures. Sites in northern 
Lincoln and central Nye are already approaching freezing, so the 
freeze warning looks good there. Winds remain elevated in the Owens 
valley, keeping temperatures in the low 40s at the moment. However, 
as the front continues to advance southeast, the pressure gradient 
and winds should relax, allowing temperatures in the northern Owens 
Valley to approach freezing. Today's highs will be about 15 
degrees lower than yesterday, finally bringing about a taste of 
fall weather. North winds are expected to remain breezy throughout
the day, with gusts generally between 15-25 mph. With clearer 
skies and lighter winds tonight, most of northern Mohave County is
forecast to reach freezing, prompting a Freeze Warning for this 
area. Breezy winds will persist in the Colorado River Valley on 
Monday, but lighten up elsewhere. Monday's highs look to be 
similar to today, with values in the mid-60s and low 70s. 

Precipitation-wise, current radar imagery shows scattered showers 
across southeastern Lincoln, northern Clark, and northern Mohave 
Counties. This precipitation will continue to move ESE with the cold 
front, exiting the CWA before sunrise. With snow levels dropping 
behind the front, some light accumulations above 7000 feet are 
possible in these areas. Dry conditions expected across the majority 
of the area, with some cold-air showers possible in eastern Lincoln 
County. Snow levels in eastern Lincoln County are forecast approach 
5000 feet tomorrow afternoon, but any precipitation amounts look to 
be minor.

.LONG TERM...Tuesday through Saturday. 

The weather pattern is forecast to transition from a dry northwest 
upper level flow on Tuesday to broad troughing across the western 
conus on Wednesday through Wednesday night. With this troughing 
moving east on Thursday, it is replaced with shortwave ridging late 
Thursday and Friday with dry conditions and light winds under zonal 
flow next weekend. 

The midweek system is expected to bring another round of gusty winds 
to the area but not of the magnitude we had yesterday. It is also 
expected to bring another round of showers to mainly Lincoln and 
northern Mohave counties. Expect moderating temperatures on Tuesday 
and Wednesday then cooling under a northerly flow on Thursday with 
temperatures again moderating heading into next weekend.
&&

.AVIATION...For Harry Reid...Much less impactful day regarding wind 
for the Harry Reid airport. A cold front passage has shifted winds 
to the northwest and that should prevail for the next 30 hours. Some 
brief periods of winds becoming more northerly or northeasterly are 
possible, but overall the expectation is northwest. Sustained 10-15 
kts with gusts of 20-25 kts are expected through much of the period 
as well, with the higher end of that estimate during the afternoon 
hours. Skies should clear through the morning as well. 

For the rest of southern Nevada, northwest Arizona and southeast 
California...Cold front passage this morning has led to winds 
shifted or about to shift to the north for all regional terminals. 
Northerly breezes will continue through the day, with peak gusts 
generally below 30 kts. Low to mid level cigs are expected through 
about 15-18Z before clearing across the region. Winds will likely 
stay breezy overnight tonight as well, especially down the CRV for 
KIFP/KEED.
&&

.SPOTTER INFORMATION STATEMENT...Spotters are encouraged to report
any significant weather or impacts according to standard operating
procedures.
&&

$$

UPDATE...Pierce

SHORT TERM...Woods
LONG TERM...Salmen
AVIATION...TB3

For more forecast information...see us on our webpage:
https://weather.gov/lasvegas or follow us on Facebook and Twitter
