FXUS65 KVEF 231936
AFDVEF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Las Vegas NV
1236 PM PDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...Cool mornings but warmer days expected through 
Wednesday. Another cold front is forecast to move through the area 
mid-week ushering in elevated winds and slightly cooler temperatures 
Thursday and Friday.
&&

.DISCUSSION...Tonight Through Sunday.

A few light showers could linger into early evening in far eastern 
Lincoln and northern Mohave Counties as a shortwave moves through 
base of the trough. Skies will clear and winds will start to relax 
overnight as shortwave shifts further east across northern Arizona 
setting up for a chilly start to Monday. A Freeze Warning remains in 
effect tonight for northern Mohave County as temperatures fall to 25-
30 degrees. Temperatures around Las Vegas forecast to dip into the 
40s the next two night. We have not seen temperatures this cool at 
Harry Reid Airport since April 12-13.

More typical cool season, progressive pattern expected the remainder 
of the time. Warmer through mid-week before we see another trough 
deepen across the Intermountain West mid-week. Elevated pre-frontal 
westerly winds will develop across the Mojave Desert Wednesday 
afternoon, while elevated northerly winds associated with the cold 
front will sweep south through southern Nevada and the Mojave Desert 
Wednesday evening into the early hours of Thursday morning. Those 
elevated north winds will mostly be stay focused within the Lake 
Mead NRA and lower CRV through Thursday. Impact to the lakes likely 
with about a 80% chance of winds reaching Lake Wind Advisory 
criteria (25 mph)on Lake Mohave. While the probability lowers to 
about 65% on Lake Mead (Boulder Basin) and Lake Havasu. Another 
brief cooldown will occur Thursday and Friday behind that cold 
front. Slight warmup next weekend under zonal flow to potentially 
weak ridging.
&&   

.AVIATION...For Harry Reid...Winds will remain north-northwesterly 
with wind gusts around 25 knots through the afternoon before 
becoming north-northeasterly around 01Z. These north-northeasterly 
winds should not go further east than 30 degrees and will have wind 
gusts around 20 knots. Winds will swing back to the northwest around 
05Z with 15-20 knot gusts. Around 17Z tomorrow morning winds will 
begin to follow typical diurnal trends.

For the rest of southern Nevada, northwest Arizona and southeast 
California...Winds at the remaining TAF sites will favor a northerly 
direction throughout the afternoon, with 20-30 knot gusts expected. 
Wind speeds will gradually come down overnight, but will continue to 
favor a more northerly component through tomorrow morning.
&&

.SPOTTER INFORMATION STATEMENT...Spotters are encouraged to report
any significant weather or impacts according to standard operating
procedures.
&&

$$


DISCUSSION...Pierce
AVIATION...Stessman

For more forecast information...see us on our webpage:
https://weather.gov/lasvegas or follow us on Facebook and Twitter
