FXUS64 KHGX 231946
AFDHGX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Houston/Galveston TX
246 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New SHORT TERM, LONG TERM, MARINE...

.SHORT TERM...
(This evening through Monday Afternoon) 
Issued at 246 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

12Z upper air obs map at 250mb reveals subtle upper level ridging 
aloft over Southeast Texas. Now check out the location of 
Roslyn...it all makes sense where the upper level clouds are coming 
in from now! Although we do have ridging aloft, the increased cloud 
cover will limit solar insolation enough to keep most of us with a 
peak temperature in the mid 80s this afternoon. It's not out of
the question for isolated spots in the upper 80s if there are
enough breaks in the clouds. With surface high pressure still off
to our east and a deepening surface low in the Central Plains, 
the pressure gradient remains tight leading to...yep you guessed 
it...another day with gusts up to 25-30 mph. This LLJ will also 
play a key role for the rainy/stormy setup on Monday/Tuesday 
(more on that in the long term discussion). 

Cloud cover will continue to increase as the remnants from Roslyn 
moves in towards Southeast Texas. PW values increase at least 
above the 75th percentile (~1.45") by tonight. With mostly cloudy 
skies overnight combined with steady WAA through onshore flow, 
you can imagine that our low temperatures will be on the mild 
side...and you'd be correct! Temperatures on Sunday night will 
mainly be in the low 70s with mid 70s along the coast. Another 
consequence of the moisture steadily increasing is that eventually
we'll have enough moisture to generate isolated rain showers. As 
of right now, this looks to be the most favorable near Galveston 
Bay with chances expanding towards the other end of the coastline 
(towards Matagorda Bay) later on Sunday night. There'll still be 
lots of dry air aloft above 2km, so anything that falls will be on
the light side today. Monday is a different story...

By Monday afternoon, we'll start to see the effects of having 
numerous factors in place that enhance our chances for rain. PW 
values surging above the 90th percentile (~1.72") as remnants from 
Roslyn moves in, an upper level trough with a strong jet streak 
entering near the Texas Panhandle, a strong shortwave trough also 
near the Texas Panhandle, and a surface cold front pushing through 
the state from west to east. The bulk of the rainfall will occur 
late Monday and into Tuesday, but we'll have enough moisture and PVA 
to generate some showers/storms ahead of the cold front especially 
for areas north of I-10 and west of I-45 on Monday 
morning/afternoon. On the positive side, we could really use this 
rainfall and it'll keep temperatures slightly cooler than Sunday as 
most locations will only reach the low 80s. Now let's get on to 
the main event and discuss the cold front and severe weather 
potential...coming up right after this brief commercial break.

Batiste

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Monday Night through Saturday) 
Issued at 246 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Welcome back! We left off with talk of a variety of factors all 
lining up with the end result being increased rain chances for 
Monday. Going into Monday night, the shortwave trough continues to
push eastward through Texas and tilts slightly negative as it 
does so. In the upper levels, a jet streak on the eastern flank of
the trough will be in the perfect placement for upper level 
divergence (right entrance region) in the overnight hours. 
Remember the LLJ that was mentioned earlier? It'll range from 
about 25-40 knots at 850mb which explains our 0-6km bulk shear of 
40-60 knots. 

So, it's no question that we'll have the moisture, lift, and 
shear in place. The instability is lacking a bit...that's not to 
say that it'll be zero though. Any of the strong storms that 
develop along the frontal boundary will have the potential to mix 
stronger winds down to the surface, so damaging winds is the 
primary threat. With plenty of shear in place, especially at the low
and mid levels, isolated tornadoes cannot be ruled out either. 
The window for potential severe weather and the best chance of 
rainfall will be late Monday into Tuesday morning as the cold 
front gets a nudge from the shortwave trough and pushes through. 

Drier and cooler air filters in in the wake of the front as 
surface high pressure builds in over the Central and Southern 
Plains. PW values decrease to below the 10th percentile (~0.55") 
by Tuesday afternoon. With that we can expect another taste of 
Fall-like conditions with daytime temperatures in 70s and lows in 
the 40s/50s for Tuesday and Wednesday. Thursday will be a 
transition day as surface high pressure pushes off to the east and
induces onshore flow once again. 

Global models are still in agreement on a coastal trough 
developing ahead of another approaching cold front at the end of 
the week. This moisture convergence leads to PW values surging 
back above the 90th percentile by Friday (snip-snap-snip-snap). As
you can expect, PoPs return to the grids Friday with the 
potential for widespread rainfall. With setups like this, we 
could see rain ahead of the front, along the front, and with 
wraparound moisture depending on how far south the surface low 
tracks. There is fairly good agreement on the timing of the next 
cold front being late Friday, but as per usual it's a bit early 
to set that in stone. Drier air does fill in behind the front 
leaving us with another cool weekend. I'll just leave it out there
that there's a fairly good chance that after Monday afternoon, 
the eastern half of Southeast TX (east of I-45) may not see a 
temperature above 80 degrees till next week... ♥

Batiste

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAF Issuance)
Issued at 1224 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Winds will continue to be the main aviation concern through this
TAF cycle. Southerly winds around 15kt with gusts in excess to
20-25kt are expected through early evening. Winds should weaken a
bit after sunset before progressively strengthening again by 
Monday morning. SCT to BKN MVFR ceilings will begin to move over 
the region late tonight into Monday ahead of an approaching cold 
front. Isolated showers will be possible around our northern 
terminals, including KCLL on Monday morning. 

05

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 246 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Surface high pressure centered to our east (eastern CONUS) and 
surface low over the High Plains will continue to bring moderate 
onshore flow into the region tonight and Monday. Gusts in excess of 
25 knots can be expected tonight with seas building around 6-8 ft. 
Small Craft Advisories remains in effect. Gusty winds and elevated 
seas are expected to continue through at least Tuesday. This is in 
response to a frontal passage that is expected to reach the coastal 
waters by early Tuesday morning. Moderate to strong offshore winds 
are expected behind the front, though winds will gradually weaken 
during the day. The cold front will also bring isolated to scattered 
showers and thunderstorms ahead and along the boundary. Therefore, 
expect increasing rain/storm chances from Monday afternoon into 
Tuesday morning. Light to occasionally moderate onshore winds will 
resume by midday Wednesday and will persist through Friday ahead 
of the next cold front. 

Beach conditions: Dangerous rip currents can be expected along all 
Gulf facing beaches tonight into Monday night. Therefore, a High Rip 
Current Risk is now in effect through late Monday. 

05

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
College Station (CLL)	  71  80  55  73 /  20  70  80   0 
Houston (IAH)			  73  83  61  73 /  10  50  80  10 
Galveston (GLS)			  75  81  65  74 /  20  30  80  10 

&&

.HGX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
TX...High Rip Current Risk through Monday evening for TXZ436>439.

GM...Small Craft Advisory until 1 PM CDT Tuesday for GMZ330-350-355-
     370-375.

     Small Craft Should Exercise Caution through Tuesday afternoon 
     for GMZ335.

&&

$$
