FXUS64 KLUB 231930
AFDLUB

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Lubbock TX
230 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New SHORT TERM, LONG TERM...

.SHORT TERM...
(This evening through Monday)
Issued at 230 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The upper level trough out west responsible for today's breezy 
conditions will shift eastward into the central CONUS to near 103W 
by Monday evening.  Lee troughing/baroclinic influences will keep 
surface winds on the breezy side despite the presence of a low level 
inversion and thin near-surface moisture overnight.  With the 
approach of the trough, we'll see a few low-level features influence 
the CWFA.  The first is a surface trough with a mild decrease in 
theta-e west of the boundary followed by a Pacific front late this 
evening sweeping NW to SE overnight.  Behind the surface boundary, 
isentropic upglide will improve in the mid-levels aided by top-down 
moistening.

In terms of palpable weather, breezy conditions will certainly be 
noticable across the region with speeds up in the mid 20s to near 30 
late this afternoon. While a few sites may flirt with advisory 
criteria, particularly during periods where cloudiness is minimized, 
overall, the expectation is we'll remain just under wind advisory 
criteria.  That said, forecast soundings (and observational cloud 
types) indicate the presence of weak mid-level instability across 
the area.  This should allow for a few virga showers to develop 
markedly increasing the threat for localized downburst activity 
thanks to downward acceleration in the sub-cloud layer. It's 
certainly possible that a severe gust could be generated under any 
virga activity late this afternoon.  

Into the evening hours, rain showers should develop in the 
aforementioned isentropic upglide regime across eastern NM and move 
into WTX.  Coverage increases with time especially after midnight 
Monday morning. Q-vector analysis shows the best upper level support 
for rain comes after midnight local and remaining favorable until 
late Monday afternoon. However, indications are that we'll have two 
opportunities for rainfall given the lower level constraints based 
on mid level deformation transients.  The first will be from 
midnight to late morning followed by a lull in many locations during 
the early afternoon thence with a second potential round late 
afternoon on the back side of the system as the trough axis passes 
aiding mid level cooling/destabilization.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Monday night through next Saturday)
Issued at 230 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The high-level trough and its associated 500 mb cyclone will 
continue to move over the South Plains and towards the Red River 
Valley during the overnight hours tomorrow night. The 1004 mb 
surface cyclone should be positioned approximately 200 miles east of 
the main vorticity lobe, with the surface cyclone in vicinity of the 
Texas Big Country, augmenting the position of the deformation bands 
across the northern and northeastern portions of the CWA. A soaking, 
cold rain event is expected to continue throughout the early morning 
hours Tuesday before quickly ending from west-to-east as NVA 
increases on the backside of the departing mid-level cyclone. While 
the columns will dry out quickly, patchy fog will be possible across 
portions of the extreme southwestern TX PH despite the presence of a 
light, westerly wind as vertical thermodynamic profiles indicate 
T/Td spreads near zero by sunrise. Temperatures will also bottom out 
into the lower-middle 30s across much of the South Plains on Tuesday 
morning, with the best potential for freezing temperatures across 
the extreme southwestern TX PH and portions of the northwestern 
South Plains. Temperatures in the Rolling Plains will be a few 
degrees warmer than locations across the Caprock, with morning lows 
and in the lower 40s.

Shortwave ridging will build in on Tuesday as the vorticity lobe 
accelerates into the middle Mississippi River Valley by solar noon, 
with highs peaking in the middle-upper 60s area-wide amidst light, 
westerly winds at around 10 mph. The warming trend will continue 
heading into Wednesday as return flow establishes across the region 
with broadly cyclonic flow encroaching the High Plains region. This 
will result in the formation of another weak surface cyclone in 
vicinity of the Raton Mesa, with breezy, southerly winds at around 
15-20 mph expected on Wednesday which will contribute to highs 
rising into the lower 70s across the CWA. Global NWP guidance 
remains in agreement with a fast-moving shortwave trough to pivot 
across the western and central U.S. by late week, though the exact 
position of the ejecting shortwave and whether or not a closed 
circulation develops aloft remains uncertain. Therefore, the blended 
PoPs have been maintained area-wide for late Thursday into Friday, 
with shortwave ridging returning by the start of next weekend.

Sincavage

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 1217 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions expected through mid-evening across the region
before rain associated with an upper level storm system begins to
move into the area (particularly after midnight local.) Ceilings
should gradually decrease with the top-down moistening of the
airmass. By Monday morning, MVFR conditions are expected with IFR
looking a bit more likely at KCDS. Wind speeds, in the mid to
upper 20s this afternoon, will only modestly decrease overnight
with a Pacific front switching winds around to the NW late
tonight.

&&

.LUB WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...26
LONG TERM....09
AVIATION...26
