FXUS64 KLUB 231720
AFDLUB

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Lubbock TX
1220 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New AVIATION...

.SHORT TERM...
(Today and tonight)
Issued at 235 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The leading edge of a strong Pacific trough that will impact our 
forecast the next few days can be seen on satellite having just 
passed the Four Corners region, slightly ahead of schedule. Out 
ahead of the advancing upper trough, we'll see similar conditions 
today that we've seen the past couple of days. Temperatures will be 
a few degrees cooler but still 5-10 degrees above normal in most 
locations with gusty southwest surface winds spreading across our 
region through the afternoon into the early evening hours, easing 
somewhat after sunset. The strongest winds will occur the farther 
west and north you go, along the NM/TX state line wrt our CWA late 
this afternoon as a series of weak vort max energy ejects east out 
ahead of the digging trough. 

After sunset we'll see a pattern change from warm and dry conditions 
the past few days, to a wet pattern that will see multiple rounds of 
rainfall to begin the new work week. Consensus is decent among CAMS 
for a surface cold front working its way southeast from eastern NM 
into the Texas Panhandle and South Plains after midnight tonight 
into the early hours of Monday morning. Boundary layer moisture will 
increase quickly out ahead of the cold front tonight, with some help 
from major hurricane Roslyn, though the best fetch of moisture will 
likely position a little east of our area as strong upper level flow 
rounding the base of the upper low headed our way sweeps it into 
central Texas. Nonetheless, PWATs will hover around an inch through 
the day today despite the warm and windy conditions and continue 
into the overnight hours as the surface cold front approaches from 
the northwest. Consensus among the CAMS has a band of elevated 
showers with some isolated thunderstorms developing around midnight 
out ahead of the surface cold front extending from Yoakum County up 
to Childress County, with more widespread rainfall and weak 
instability associated along the approaching front by sunrise 
tomorrow.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Monday through Saturday)
Issued at 235 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Daybreak Monday opens with a Pacific cold front edging east through 
the Rolling Plains in advance of an upper trough digging across the 
Four Corners. Ahead of this main trough, a lead impulse (currently 
an upper low off the Baja) will be found charging NE across West TX 
and should aid in an uptick in convection during the morning, mainly 
along the cold front found pushing off the Caprock. MLCAPEs around 
800 J/kg ahead of the front and stronger convergence may breed a 
loose squall line in our SE zones around daybreak with a
conditional threat for severe wind and hail. Behind the front, 
improving height falls and the arrival of mid and upper wind 
maxima accompanying the lead impulse will coincide with 
respectable PWATs around 1" on the Caprock. This should open the 
door to a band of scattered showers zipping NE ahead of mid-level 
dry slotting and a steady reduction in PoPs by late morning on 
the Caprock. This subsidence will relocate off the Caprock by the 
afternoon ahead of a mid-level low progged to reach the western 
South Plains by sunset. Preceding this low, the leading edge of a
hefty mid-level cold pocket should reach our western zones during
peak heating and be the focus for the second round of showers and
storms, especially in our NW counties where a deformation zone 
will likely set up and lead to the most widespread QPF. Although 
CAPE on the Caprock is shown to be very weak overall during the 
afternoon, it's not uncommon to have some low-topped pulse storms
as these strong cold pockets arrive. Otherwise, the greatest PoPs
remain confined to the developing deformation zone expected to 
track ESE from our NW zones by the afternoon to the central 
Rolling Plains by midnight, and eventually depart our CWA before 
daybreak Tue. Total rainfall AOA 1/2" favors this deformation 
zone with markedly lower values to its south where dry slotting
and prolonged subsidence will be more prevalent. High temps on 
Monday continue to reside below the NBM, although still not as 
chilly as the MAV.

Breezy NW winds Monday night will eventually taper toward daybreak 
and may set the stage for a very light freeze in a few spots such as 
Muleshoe, Hart and Friona. Dry and stable NW flow behind the upper 
cyclone on Tue will make for a pleasantly cool day. Deeper westerly 
flow by Wednesday will foster improved warming while dewpoints 
slowly creep higher, mainly off the Caprock ahead of a surface 
trough. This moisture could pay off dividends by Thu night and Fri 
as the next trough digs over the southern High Plains and closes off 
into a low. NBM's chance PoPs seem fitting for now given some 
sizable NWP spread with the timing and track of this late week
wave.

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 1217 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions expected through mid-evening across the region
before rain associated with an upper level storm system begins to
move into the area (particularly after midnight local.) Ceilings
should gradually decrease with the top-down moistening of the
airmass. By Monday morning, MVFR conditions are expected with IFR
looking a bit more likely at KCDS. Wind speeds, in the mid to
upper 20s this afternoon, will only modestly decrease overnight
with a Pacific front switching winds around to the NW late
tonight.

&&

.LUB WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...55
LONG TERM....93
AVIATION...26
