FXUS64 KHGX 231733
AFDHGX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Houston/Galveston TX
1233 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New AVIATION...

.SHORT TERM...
(Today through Tuesday) 
Issued at 250 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Our long discussed frontal passage has now passed into the short
term! Barely. We'll get there. In the meantime, we're dealing with
a warm sector environment giving us temperatures above seasonal
averages - nice, for those who like it hot and an uncomfortable
reminder of the summer for those looking forward to winter. We're
also getting more humid as the direct, breezy flow off the Gulf of
Mexico is helping to boost moisture from south to north. Per
satellite data early this morning, our precipitable water values
are nearing and inch and at least 90 percent of normal across the
entire forecast area.

For what it's worth, the pattern aloft is zonal or even mildly
ridgy over Southeast Texas. That feature will make today yet
another in our string of fair weather days, albeit on the warm end
and more humid. But take a glance upstream on a satellite image 
(pick something, anything; I personally recommend the low or mid-
altitude water vapor imagery this morning) and you can see all 
three features expected to play an influence on our upcoming 
weather: a powerful upper trough in the northern stream, a subtle 
shortwave trough in the southern stream, and - perhaps most 
dramatically - Hurricane Roslyn nearing landfall on Mexico's 
Pacific Coast.

So, today, fairly straight-forward. Highs in the middle 80s
inland, lower 80s at the coast. Breezy south winds, helping to
boost dewpoints into the 60s area-wide and to around 70 at the
coast. This moisture return and upglide of the incoming airmass
should give us more clouds today than in previous days, and even a
slight chance of weak, brief showers at the coast. Nobody should
necessarily expect to get any rain today, but if you live within a
county or so of the Gulf, maybe don't be super, super surprised if
you get struck by about 9 rain drops.

Tomorrow, we see more significant changes. Though we're certainly
not looking to see anything tied to Roslyn's surface circulation,
which will get shredded in Mexico's mountainous terrain (likely
causing heavy rainfall and a flooding threat there), we will see
an influx of moisture a little bit aloft, plus cyclonic vorticity
advection at higher levels associated with the storm's remnants.
This looks to give us a better chance of showers and storms ahead
of the incoming cold front, lagging back in North Texas. Indeed,
the front looks to stall out a bit Monday afternoon, only getting
going again once a potent vort max in the main trough axis digs
into Texas and phases with the shortwave trough, potentially
spinning up a new surface low in the frontal zone. At the least,
this should reinvigorate this southern extent of the original 
front.

As that happens, we should expect a jump up in convective
potential going into Monday evening along and ahead of the front.
This will start to our west in the Hill Country and Central 
Texas, but gradually move into our area in the late evening and 
overnight hours. Increasing convective intensity into the 
nighttime is not our usual pattern, but the pre-frontal airmass
should be warm and humid enough for some moderate instability even
in the lack of daytime heating, and the wind fields should support
sufficient shear to support some threat of strong to severe storms
until the front moves through in the pre-dawn and early morning
hours of Tuesday, with damaging winds the primary threat. A
secondary threat could be an outside shot at getting a brief 
tornado embedded in the line of storms marching through.

Expect the front to sweep through quickly Tuesday morning, leaving
the area seeing gusty northwest winds by early afternoon, with a
cooling and drying airmass that will transition us into the long
term portion of the forecast.

Luchs

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Tuesday Night through Saturday) 
Issued at 250 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Drier and colder air quickly fills in behind the front, so
temperatures early Wednesday morning will drop and by sunrise,
lows will have reached the mid to upper 40s with the exception of
our northeastern counties which will reach the lower 40s. Despite
mostly sunny skies on Wednesday, daytime highs will only reach the
mid 70s. By Thursday, temperatures will start to creep back up as
onshore flow returns, ushering in warmer and higher DP air.
Daytime highs will creep back into the 80s. 

By late Thursday evening and into Friday morning, global models 
are starting to hint at a coastal trough developing near 
Brownsville and pushing northeast towards the Southeast Texas 
Coast by Friday morning. This will coincide with the next upper
level shortwave and surface front pushing through Texas.
Typically, the combination of these two features (a coastal
trough and a surface front) brings plenty of rain for our area, so
keep an eye out for the extended forecast as much can change until
next Friday. As of right now, we can anticipate around an inch of
rain across Southeast Texas with slightly higher amounts near the
coast and offshore. 

Walts

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAF Issuance)
Issued at 1224 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Winds will continue to be the main aviation concern through this
TAF cycle. Southerly winds around 15kt with gusts in excess to
20-25kt are expected through early evening. Winds should weaken a
bit after sunset before progressively strengthening again by 
Monday morning. SCT to BKN MVFR ceilings will begin to move over 
the region late tonight into Monday ahead of an approaching cold 
front. Isolated showers will be possible around our northern 
terminals, including KCLL on Monday morning. 

05

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 250 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Moderate to fresh onshore winds will prevail through tonight, 
prompting a Small Craft Advisory for most of our coastal waters 
except Galveston Bay where Small Craft Should Exercise Caution. By
Monday morning and throughout the day on Monday, we can expect 
isolated to scattered showers and storms to push through our 
coastal waters ahead of a cold front. This cold front will push 
through early Tuesday morning, ushering in offshore winds and 
another surge of 25kt winds. Offshore winds will persist until 
Thursday ahead of the next frontal passage. 

Persistent moderate to fresh onshore winds will also increase the
rip current risk along our beaches, so we anticipate another rip
current statement needed for today. 

Walts

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
College Station (CLL)	  86  72  83  56 /   0  10  70  80 
Houston (IAH)			  85  73  84  61 /  10  10  20  90 
Galveston (GLS)			  82  75  82  65 /  20  20  20  90 

&&

.HGX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
TX...High Rip Current Risk through Monday morning for TXZ436>439.

GM...Small Craft Advisory until 7 AM CDT Monday for GMZ330-350-355-
     370-375.

     Small Craft Should Exercise Caution through Monday morning for 
     GMZ335.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...25
LONG TERM....16
AVIATION...05
