FXUS64 KEWX 231955
AFDEWX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Austin/San Antonio TX
255 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New SHORT TERM, LONG TERM...

.SHORT TERM...
(Tonight through Monday night)
Issued at 255 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

3 significant weather features are easily depicted on satellite 
imagery upstream of TX this afternoon, including a large polar 
trough over the Rockies, a smaller scale subtropical low just west 
of the Baja CA peninsula, and rapidly weakening tropical Storm 
Roslyn over the higher terrain of central Mexico. As the subtropical 
disturbance wraps NE into the base of the polar trough, it will 
deepen the polar trough into a stronger, more compact upper low over 
the Red River valley through Monday evening. Meanwhile the mountains 
of Mexico will continue to shred the dynamics and moisture from 
Roslyn, sending fragments of energy into the conveyor belt of this 
storm system throughout the day Monday into late Monday night.

So while South Central TX was able to enjoy a partly sunny and warm 
weekend, the weather will take a sharp turn for the unstable for 
tonight through Monday night. Evening condition should be mostly 
fair, but there are a few models spitting out some elevated showers 
over the southern Edwards Plateau this evening. Lifting processes 
should escalate by midnight and a few embedded storms are forecast 
in the early AM hours Monday. While the moisture profile will 
initially contain a dry mid level section of air, areas of deeper 
convection might take over toward daybreak with the leading edge of 
the deeper convection possibly strong enough to spit out some small 
hail. A clouded sky and continued influx of Gulf low level moisture 
and breezy surface winds means we'll see the warmest overnight low 
temps in several days for Monday. 

By daybreak Monday, the sounding moistens up throughout the low to 
mid levels of the troposphere with PWat values reaching 1.6 to 2.2 
inches across most of the area and a favorable hodograph for 
rotating storms. The early morning SPC Marginal Risk was expanded to 
west of Hwy. 83, with a Slight Risk upgrade added to areas east of 
Llano to Cotulla. In this Slight Risk area the moisture profile will 
become most suitable for deep convection and thus a low end tornado 
threat along with other standard severe threats from supercells and 
merging storms. Hail sizes should be mostly an inch or less due to 
the high moisture content expected in these storms. As the storms 
upscale into clusters, the threats could shift to more winds and 
torrential rainfall, and there may be decreasing opportunities for 
low level winds to converge on a point to support supercells. 
However, while the torrential rainfall could lead to a rapid dump of 
2 inches in just half an hour, we expect to see storm motions to be 
quite progressive, thus minimizing the threat for high impact 
flooding. Daytime QPF amounts through 00Z Tuesday might look like 
what is seen from the WPC driven 6 hour images, showing streaks of 
enhanced precipitation maxima up to 2 inches over the central and 
eastern counties with most areas falling short of half an inch, and 
perhaps no rain at all near the Rio Grande. Late Monday afternoon, 
the subtropical disturbance is almost fully absorbed into the broader 
trough/conveyor belt, but a wake of subsidence, lowering PWat 
values, and a shift of winds to the SW should create a period of 
respite that shifts west to NE into the early evening. However, the 
final wave of convection should begin to take shape over the 
Northern Hill County toward 00Z Tuesday with strong discrete storm 
cells forming along and ahead of the cold front and strengthening 
polar trough.

The new storms forming early Tuesday evening will have lower PWat 
values and reduced helicities to work with. The shift of winds to SW 
may only be temporary for some areas and a more favorable 
environment for rotating storms is expected to become possible again 
as the storms reach the I-35 corridor. Discrete strong to severe 
cells should begin merging into a line fairly quick, and this should 
lower what tornado threat there might be a more merging cells/line 
segment kinks/brief QLCS episodes. In the late evening the feeling 
is that strong mid level winds will push the line at an accelerated 
speed and lower both rain and severe chances over the eastern 
counties a few hours after midnight. Rainfall amounts from this 
activity should be less capable of producing a flooding rain, but 
local areas where heavy rains already happened might be vulnerable 
to brief run-off concerns. Storm totals by 12Z Tuesday should again 
be for most areas receiving 0.5 to 1 inch type rains, western areas 
receiving less than 1/4 inch, and some central and eastern counties 
seeing steaks of local maxima of maybe 2-3 inches. Gusty winds and a 
nice drop in temperatures are expected over the Hill Country in the 
early AM hours Tuesday.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Tuesday through Sunday)
Issued at 255 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A much drier airmass with breezy northwesterly winds advects into 
the region during Tuesday following the cold front from Monday night 
and with the upper level low across North Texas starting to lift 
northeastward. Abundance of sunshine results in seasonable afternoon 
highs ranging from the mid 70s to the low 80s. With the drier air 
and breezy northwesterly winds, elevated to near critical fire 
weather concerns are expected Tuesday afternoon, particularly to any 
areas that miss out on the rainfall in the short term. Wind speeds 
subside into and through Tuesday night, leading to a quick cooldown 
with overnight lows ranging from the mid 40s to low 50s over most 
areas while cooler valley locations could see the lows drop as low 
as 40 degrees. A southeasterly flow returns sometime Wednesday and 
will increase during the day on Thursday. This will yield to a 
gradual warming trend and rise of the dew points across the region. 
However, conditions overall will generally remain seasonably cool 
in the mornings and seasonably mild during the afternoons.

The next opportunity for unsettled weather then arrives from late 
Thursday through Friday as a digging upper level trough across the 
Rockies evolves into an upper low into North-Central Texas. With the 
latest model suite coming into better alignment on this system and 
its timing, have elected to raise rain/storm chances into the medium 
(30-50%) range during Thursday night into Friday morning around and 
along the arrival of the Pacific front in association with this 
upper level storm system. Rain chances looks to diminish from Friday 
afternoon into Friday night as breezy northwesterly winds help to 
advect a drier airmass across the region from west to east. The 
winds will gradually subside into what looks like a rather pleasant 
and rain free weekend with more seasonably cool mornings and mild 
afternoons. 

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 1246 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Gusty winds to around 28 knots along I-35 should hasten low level 
mixing and push stratus to VFR levels for nearly all areas by around 
20Z. Relatively lower cigs may linger most over the Rio Grande where 
energy and moisture from Roslyn have already begun to impact cloud 
cover. Areas of stratus should form more readily after 00Z and
periods of IFR cigs are expected for most areas late tonight. By 09Z
some scattered showers should begin to move toward the I-35 corridor,
but will show more active conditions at 12Z and afterwards. Isolated
storms will become possible, but mainly in the 24-30 hour time frame. 

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Austin Camp Mabry              71  81  55  76 /  30  80  60   0 
Austin Bergstrom Intl Airport  71  80  54  76 /  30  80  60   0 
New Braunfels Muni Airport     72  86  56  78 /  30  70  60   0 
Burnet Muni Airport            71  80  52  74 /  40  80  30   0 
Del Rio Intl Airport           71  89  56  77 /  20  20  10   0 
Georgetown Muni Airport        71  78  52  75 /  30  80  50   0 
Hondo Muni Airport             72  88  56  80 /  40  40  30   0 
San Marcos Muni Airport        71  83  55  77 /  30  70  60   0 
La Grange - Fayette Regional   72  81  57  76 /  20  60  80   0 
San Antonio Intl Airport       72  86  57  78 /  40  60  60   0 
Stinson Muni Airport           73  88  58  80 /  40  50  50   0 

&&

.EWX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

Short-Term...Oaks
Long-Term...Brady
Aviation...Oaks
