FXUS63 KDVN 212342
AFDDVN

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Quad Cities IA IL
642 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...AVIATION UPDATE...

.SYNOPSIS...
Issued at 139 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A breezy, mild and dry early afternoon was unfolding across all of 
eastern Iowa, northwest Illinois and far northeast Missouri. 17z 
analysis depicted broad high pressure stretching from the Southeast 
into New England, with lower pressures from the Great Lakes into the 
Southern Plains. A weak cold front was analyzed from northwest 
Wisconsin to Nebraska, as has been moving southeast over the last 12-
24 hours. Temperatures as of 130 PM ranged from 72 in 
Independence to 82 in Washington and Fairfield.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(This Evening through Saturday)
Issued at 139 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

[Key Messages]

1) Windy this afternoon and again Saturday afternoon

2) Dry conditions and above normal temperatures into the weekend

[Discussion]

Primary short term concerns are elevated fire concerns and winds. 
See the Fire Weather section for additional details. 

Aforementioned cold front will continue to drift south into the 
Midwest as we head through the evening. However, this front will 
stall just to our north tonight, and will retreat back north with 
strengthening southerly flow Saturday. This will be occurring due to 
a deep trough traversing the Rockies.

All of this will translate to continued dry weather with 
temperatures averaging well above normal for late October (normal 
highs in the upper 50s-low 60s). Look for highs in the upper 70s to 
low 80s Saturday, with overnight lows only dropping into the 50s and 
60s. Skies will feature a mix of sun and clouds.

.LONG TERM...(Saturday Night through Friday)
Issued at 139 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

[Key Messages]

1. Warm and breezy Saturday into Monday, with farm field fire concern

2. Rain chances Sunday night through Tuesday

3. 50s return mid to late next week

[Discussion]

Sunday, dry conditions will persist with southerly winds gusting to 
25 to 35 MPH at times as a low pressure system in the Plains 
ushers warm temperatures into the region. Highs will be well above
normal, with readings topping out in the mid 70s to low 80s. 
There will be a continued elevated fire danger risk for farm 
fields, as any fire that were to start could spread quickly with 
the dry and gusty conditions.

Sunday night into Tuesday, rain chances will return to the area as 
the Plains low brings a cold front through the area and some 
disturbances lift northward along it as it moves across the region. 
There are some timing and placement differences, but rain chances 
are appearing more likely.  The current collaborated forecast has 40 
POPS for the northern CWA Sunday night with the better chances (40-
70 percent) slated for Monday afternoon through Tuesday across the 
entire CWA associated with the fropa and a southern Plains low 
lifting northward along it. 

Wednesday through Friday, the forecast blend favors a drying trend 
with high pressure bringing cooler temperatures back into the area. 
Highs in the 50s and lows in the 30s/40s are are currently forecast 
by the NBM.  Precip chances may return later in the week, but 
guidance remains mixed on timing and coverage.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 639 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR conditions are expected across the area through the period.
Similar to today, winds will increase throughout the day tomorrow
with gusts in the afternoon.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 139 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

An elevated fire danger for agriculture will be present across all 
of eastern Iowa, northwest Illinois, and far northeast Missouri 
today into the weekend. Current GFDIag values max out in the very 
high range, especially Sunday PM. The driving factors will 
primarily be warm temperatures and breezy south/southwest winds 
gusting near 35 MPH. Thankfully, with increasing moisture from the
southerly flow RH values will only bottom out in the 50-60% 
range. 

Any outdoor burning should be avoided if possible this weekend.

&&

.DVN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IA...NONE.
IL...NONE.
MO...NONE.
&&

$$

SYNOPSIS...Speck
SHORT TERM...Speck
LONG TERM...Speck/Ervin
AVIATION...Gibbs
FIRE WEATHER...Speck
