FXUS63 KDMX 232014
AFDDMX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Des Moines IA
314 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.DISCUSSION.../Tonight through Sunday/
Issued at 240 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Forecast Highlights: 
--Warm, near record-breaking temperatures today for some.
--Windy into tonight with elevated fire danger.
--Conditional severe threat tonight, few strong storms possible 
 with wind the primary threat.
--Rain persists through Monday with cooler, more seasonal, 
temperatures to start new work week.

Discussion: 

Active weather day today with wind, fire weather, near-record warm 
temperatures, and storm chances to all discuss. Let's dig in. 

OVERVIEW & TEMPERATURES: 
Upper-level pattern this morning shows a 
deepening trough over the western US with a developing closed low 
over the northern Rockies into this afternoon. An upper-level jet 
rounding the base of the trough looks to merge with another jet over 
the southwest US through the day today lifting into the Midwest into 
this evening. As this jet lifts further north and east tonight, the 
upper Midwest, including portions of especially northwest Iowa, will 
be in the left exit region of this 130-140+ knot jet. 

In the mid-levels, southerly to southwesterly flow will continue to 
bring ample warm air advection into the state through the day as 
H850 temps reach the +16 to +20C degree range by around 00Z with the 
thermal ridge just off to the west. This will allow for another day 
of warm temperatures in the 80s, 20-25F above climate normals for 
this time of year, and may cause some high temperature records to 
fall, especially at central/southern sites (Lamoni most likely to 
have their temperature records fall - see the climate section for 
the records themselves).

Temperatures will start to fall tonight as a cold front sweeps 
through the state west to east beginning during the overnight hours 
west and exiting the state in the east tomorrow afternoon/early 
evening. The timing of the frontal passage will keep low 
temperatures generally above normal tonight across the area but will 
send high temperatures in the west back towards seasonal levels in 
the upper 50s/low 60s. Behind the cold front tomorrow night, 
temperatures look to remain around seasonal levels through the work 
week in the 50s for highs and 30s/low 40s for lows. 

WINDS & FIRE WEATHER: 
A deepening surface low moving through NE 
today ahead of the upper-level trough had already caused the 
pressure gradient to tighten early this morning with wind gusts of 
25-35 mph already common by around 10AM. Winds are only forecasted 
to increase from here as the pressure gradient continues to amplify 
with the low lifting east/northeast into tonight, arriving near the 
ND/SD/MN border late tonight. Forecast soundings continue to 
indicate 35-45 knot winds (40-50 mph) within the mixed layer with 
some near to over 50 knot winds at the top of the mixed layer later 
this evening. As mentioned in the previous discussion, the wind gust 
potential is somewhat capped by the elevated mixed layer, which was 
observed to be over 2km in depth, extending through the 850-700mb 
layer (1-3+km layer) on the 12Z OAX RAOB. Probably not as likely to 
bring winds down from the top of the mixed layer with some competing 
factors in place (warm air advection causes rising motion) this 
afternoon, but a 50-70 knot low level jet noses into the area early 
evening increasing in strength into tonight allowing for some of 
these stronger wind gusts to potentially be realized in some 
locations tonight. Overall, messaging generally remains the same 
that it will be windy this afternoon into tonight, especially over 
the western half of Iowa, with gusts towards 50 mph possible at 
times, as outlined in the Wind Advisory issued by the previous shift 
and remains in effect until 2AM tonight.

The winds will remain elevated into tomorrow with some 15-25 knot 
wind gusts remaining behind the cold front before finally relaxing 
some tomorrow evening. 

These winds will also keep fire weather conditions elevated this 
afternoon with burning certainly discouraged given the prevailing 
dry conditions, cured crops, near to fully cured grasslands, and 
these very windy conditions, despite minimum relative humidity 
values only dropping into the 35-45% range this afternoon. 
Precipitation and cooler temperatures will help ease fire weather 
conditions tomorrow. 

SEVERE CHANCES TONIGHT/RAIN INTO TOMORROW: 

A conditional severe threat remains this evening with the 
aforementioned elevated mixed layer keeping ample inhibition around 
and thus keeping any surface-based parcels capped. However, with the 
low-level and upper-level jet moving in as well as the cold front 
looking to move into the area later tonight, plenty of forcing 
mechanisms exist to help kick off some storms with ample shear of 40-
50 knots in some cases. With overall instability a little less 
favorable, especially given the overall MLCIN values in the 200-300 
range per SPC mesoanalysis at 19Z, any storms that do form will have 
a difficult time maintaining updrafts which certainly helps limits 
hail growth. With the overall environmental wind and shear profiles, 
it would not take much for a strong to severe wind gust to reach the 
surface, even with weaker storms and any storms that do form will 
have very fast storm motions given these same profiles.

The aforementioned cold front will bring some renewed precipitation 
chances on Monday, especially areas central to southeast, which 
could bring some 0.5-1" QPF amounts to a lucky few in mainly 
southeast Iowa. As these showers will be primarily post-frontal, no 
severe weather concerns exist with any rain that does fall likely a 
welcome change given our overall dry conditions of late. Behind the 
cold front, quiet weather returns for a few days before additional 
rain chances return around Thursday.  


&&

.AVIATION.../For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon/
Issued at 1243 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Main aviation concerns continue to be windy conditions with winds
out of the south gusting to 30-40 knots, some higher gusts at 
times, through this evening. Period of LLWS this evening into the 
overnight hours with a strong low-level jet tonight. Some
shower/thunderstorm chances tonight into tomorrow with scattered 
to isolated coverage tonight keeping confidence low in exact 
timing/impacts at specific TAF sites, thus will send amendments as
necessary. More widespread rain chances tomorrow during the day, 
especially southeast, with additional mentions for showers likely 
to be added in future issuances. 


&&

.CLIMATE...
Issued at 240 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Current Record Highs This Afternoon (10/23): 
Des Moines: 84 (1899) 
Waterloo: 86 (1899) 
Mason City: 82 (1963)
Ottumwa: 83 (1963)
Lamoni: 84 (1921)

&&

.DMX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Wind Advisory until 2 AM CDT Monday for IAZ004>007-015>017-
023>027-033>038-044>048-057>060-070>073-081>084-092>095.

&&

$$

DISCUSSION...KCM
AVIATION...KCM
CLIMATE...KCM
