FXUS63 KDVN 231747
AFDDVN

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Quad Cities IA IL
1247 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...AVIATION UPDATE...

.SYNOPSIS...
Issued at 330 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Dry conditions were seen across the region, although an area of low 
pressure is beginning to take shape over the WY/NE border region. 
This surface low will gradually make its way eastward, influencing 
our weather for today into Monday.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today and tonight)
Issued at 343 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Summary...strong, gusty southerly winds are expected today, with 
more elevated fire weather conditions. Chances of showers and 
perhaps some thunderstorms will be possible tonight.

Yet another windy day is on tap across the region, as a 
strengthening surface low deepens over the Great Plains states. This 
surface low will be anomalously strong, thanks to a coupled upper-
level jet streak set-up helping to support rapid lee 
cyclogenesis. Model guidance has been progging a central pressure 
of around 980 to 985 hPa, which is close to the bottom of the 
NAEFS climatology. A tight pressure gradient will settle in, 
resulting in strong, gusty southerly winds. Sustained winds of 15 
to 25 mph, and gusts up to around 40 mph, are expected. With these
winds, there is concern for dangerous fire weather conditions once
again, although relative humidity is expected to be higher today 
compared to Saturday. Still, if a fire were to start in these 
windy conditions, they will likely spread rapidly, so be extremely
careful of burning today. As a result, we have issued a Special
Weather Statement across our entire forecast area to convey the
threat for rapidly spreading fires.

The aforementioned surface low will quickly lift northeastward 
tonight, ushering in a cold front in its wake. This front will 
gradually make its way eastward into the Corn Belt states Monday 
morning. Ahead of the front, a very strong 55 to 65+ kt low-level 
jet (LLJ) will develop, which will act to increase chances of 
showers and thunderstorms tonight due to increased theta-e and 
moisture transport. Models don't show much in the way of QPF, with
most locations only expected to see a few hundredths of an inch 
of rainfall, if that. The bulk of the rainfall with this system
will occur Monday and Monday night (see the Long Term discussion
below). With the strong nocturnal LLJ, wind gusts aren't expected
to taper off after sunset, so gusts of 25 to 35 mph will likely 
linger through the overnight hours.

.LONG TERM...(Monday through Saturday)
Issued at 330 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Messages:

1. Rain Monday and Tuesday

2. 70s Monday, then mid 50s to low 60s Tuesday through Saturday

Monday through Tuesday night, a cold front will move across the area 
bringing some much needed rainfall to the area as we haven't had 
appreciable rainfall (>.10) in about 10 days.  The front is still on 
track to move through the area Monday afternoon and night. The 
forecast blend has an axis of categorical POPs in the western CWA 
Monday afternoon, through the central portions during the evening, 
and east overnight. Some lingering chance/likely POPs are along and 
east of the MS River for Tuesday, as a surface low tracks across 
southern IL. Rainfall amounts will mainly be in the 0.50 to 0.75 
inch range with southern areas seeing amounts near an inch. Parts of 
NW IL may see lower amounts closer to a third of an inch. 
Temperatures on Monday will still be mild with highs in the low to 
mid 70s. Tuesday readings will mainly be in the 50s. 

Wednesday and Thursday, dry conditions are expected as high pressure 
moves through the Midwest. Temperatures will be in the mid 50s to 
near 60. 

Friday and Saturday, there are some model differences and thus low 
confidence in precip chances.  Through collaboration, opted to keep 
slight POPs through the period at this time. Highs into Sunday will 
still be in the 55 to 60 degree range.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1243 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions will be seen through 18z/24 as a storm system moves
east from the Plains. After 00z/24 isolated to scattered SHRA are
expected with the possibility of an isolated TSRA. The probability
of a TSRA impacting a TAF site is around 10 percent. Additionally,
LLWS will develop again with sunset and continue through sunrise
Monday. Starting close to 18z/24 a large band of rain will 
develop across eastern Iowa with conditions deteriorating to MVFR 
that will slowly spread east through 00z/25.

&&

.DVN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IA...NONE.
IL...NONE.
MO...NONE.
&&

$$

SYNOPSIS...Schultz
SHORT TERM...Schultz
LONG TERM...14
AVIATION...08
