FXUS63 KDMX 231753
AFDDMX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Des Moines IA
1253 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Updated for the 18z Aviation Discussion...

.DISCUSSION.../Today through Saturday/
Issued at 357 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Messages:
-- Windy later today into tonight with elevated fire weather
-- Warm with record highs challenged in a few places
-- Few strong to maybe severe storms tonight, more rain Monday
-- Cooler, but seasonal Tuesday through end of next week

Details: A sharp and deepening trough is viewable in the GOES-East 
upper level water vapor imagery early this morning over the western 
CONUS, which will bring our active weather later today through 
early Tuesday. At the moment, Nighttime Microphysics RGB shows a 
nearly clear sky outside of scattered low clouds near Mason City 
to Iowa City. This will set the stage for a good amount of 
sunshine across the area with warm conditions as temperatures peak
near or into the low 80s. For Des Moines and a few other 
locations, record highs may be challenged. The other story today 
will be increasing winds as surface low pressure ahead of the 
aforementioned trough deepens and causes the pressure gradient 
across the region to amplify. The wind gust potential will be 
somewhat capped due to an elevated mixed layer (EML), which was 
sampled on the 00z KOAX RAOB just above 850mb/1km. Still, BUFKIT 
soundings show top of the mixed boundary layer winds at or above 
40 knots by later this afternoon, mainly over our west central 
into our southwest counties. The boundary layer will mix and 
bring down slightly drier air, but dewpoints will still peak well
into the 50s with afternoon minimum relative humidity around or 
higher than 35%. Fire weather concerns are certainly elevated 
today, especially west of Highway 169, due to the curing 
grasslands and particularly for the cured agricultural croplands. 

The EML will also be key for our convective chances later today as a 
surface cold front enters the state. There is more agreement that 
the EML will cap surface parcels and thus think most if not all 
convection will wait til around if not after sunset. Latest HRRR 
shows some percolation of simulated radar echos close to 23z with 
the more convective prone FV3 looking a little more in progress with 
its storm development. As mentioned last night, the GFS/FV3 
continues to over mix the boundary layer and while soundings tonight 
do show an EML still present, it may not be enough convective 
inhibition to prevent its cumulus parameterization from firing off. 
The higher chances elevated convection will be in the overnight 
hours as the cold front brings forcing into the region. At this 
time, a widespread line of storms is unlikely and coverage looks
isolated to at worst scattered. MUCAPE values of 500 to 750 J/kg,
lapse rates around 7C/km, and deep layer shear in excess of 40 
knots will favor a few strong storms ahead of the front. Low 
level kinematics will be impressive with a 40 to 50 knot 925mb jet
and a 60 to 70 knot 850mb jet. This low level jet will be 
important for two reasons. First, while typically a nighttime 
inversion develops in the evening, which causes winds to decrease,
conditions will already be windy with mechanical mixing 
occurring. Compared to last night's 0z soundings, tonight's 
soundings needed less momentum transfer to stay mixed into the 
evening hours ahead of the front. Thus, think the boundary layer 
will stay mixed in the warm sector and BUFKIT soundings show top 
of mixed layer winds of 50 to around 60 knots with wind gusts at 
the surface possibly nearing 45 knots at times in the synoptic 
environment. Secondly, with shower and storm bases around 1.5 to 
2km and low relative humidity in the subcloud layer, a downdraft 
may entrain these stronger winds to the surface. This is the main 
severe concern with development this evening with small hail a 
lesser concern given the skinnier CAPE profile.

So, what does this mean for weather headlines? Based on the strong, 
gusty southerly winds and the state of fuels, a Red Flag Warning was 
considered despite the minimum relative humidity being higher 
than criteria. We typically do not like to have dual (or it is it 
dueling?) headlines so raised the wind advisory for all but some 
of our eastern counties from mid-afternoon into a little after 
midnight tonight. In there, we mention the concern for elevated 
fire weather. The wind advisory may be started on the early side 
for locations closer to the Minnesota border and I-35, but prefer
to have just one headline start time for simplicity. Overall, the
peak winds look to be this evening as the low level jet increases
and the mixed boundary layer taps into the higher top of mixed
layer winds transfer some of that potential to the surface. Finally,
will likely issue an SPS later this morning in the areas not 
covered by a wind headline for gusty winds and elevated fire 
weather concerns. 

The cold front will continue to progress eastward across the state 
on Monday. Moisture from the remnants of Hurricane Roslyn will ride 
along the front from the southern Plains into the lower mid-
Mississippi Valley ahead of the positively tilted trough axis. This 
will bring renewed rain chances over eastern into parts of central 
Iowa later Monday through early Tuesday morning. As a potent 
shortwave trough at the base of the longwave trough lifts 
northeastward over the Ozarks and causes the trough to begin to 
tilt negatively, shower chances may linger over southeastern Iowa
on Tuesday. Drier and cooler conditions will arrive later Tuesday
through Wednesday with another approaching trough by Thursday. 
This could bring scattered showers back to the state later 
Thursday or Friday.

&&

.AVIATION.../For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon/
Issued at 1243 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Main aviation concerns continue to be windy conditions with winds
out of the south gusting to 30-40 knots, some higher gusts at 
times, through this evening. Period of LLWS this evening into the 
overnight hours with a strong low-level jet tonight. Some
shower/thunderstorm chances tonight into tomorrow with scattered 
to isolated coverage tonight keeping confidence low in exact 
timing/impacts at specific TAF sites, thus will send amendments as
necessary. More widespread rain chances tomorrow during the day, 
especially southeast, with additional mentions for showers likely 
to be added in future issuances. 

&&

.CLIMATE...
Issued at 350 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Current Record Highs This Afternoon (10/23): 
Des Moines: 84 (1899) 
Waterloo: 86 (1899) 
Mason City: 82 (1963) 
Ottumwa: 83 (1963) 
Lamoni: 84 (1921)

&&

.DMX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Wind Advisory until 2 AM CDT Monday for IAZ004>007-015>017-
023>027-033>038-044>048-057>060-070>073-081>084-092>095.

&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Ansorge
AVIATION...KCM
CLIMATE...KCM
