FXUS63 KDVN 231955
AFDDVN

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Quad Cities IA IL
255 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Issued at 230 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

18Z surface data has an intense storm system in central South Dakota 
southeast of KD07. A warm front ran east and then southeast from the 
low to near KFSD and then into northeast Missouri. A cold front ran 
southwest from the low into northeast Colorado. Dew points were in 
the 50s from the upper Midwest and Great Lakes into the lower 
Mississippi Valley. Dew points in the 30s and 40s were behind the 
cold front and low center.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday night)
Issued at 230 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The warm front will sweep through the area tonight. Ahead of the 
front isolated to scattered showers/sprinkles and possibly an 
isolated thunderstorm are possible. After midnight a lull in 
precipitation should be seen as the cold front moves into the 
western half of Iowa.

Windy conditions will continue overnight with 15 to 25 mph common 
and some gusts approaching 35 mph.

On Monday the cold front will move into eastern Iowa by late 
morning. Ahead of the front isolated to scattered showers and a few 
thunderstorms are possible.

The better forcing is along/behind the front. By late morning a 
large band of post frontal rain will start developing across eastern 
Iowa and slowly move east through the afternoon. Cloud cover and 
eventual rain will keep temperatures cooler but still well above 
normal for late October.

The main rain shield will move from west to east across the area 
Monday night with the cold front. A general rain will be seen across 
the area with rainfall of 0.25 to 0.5 inches. Low temperatures 
Monday night will occur around or shortly after sunrise Tuesday.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Sunday)
Issued at 230 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Tuesday

A mid-level trough will split into two pockets of vorticity as it
swings through the Midwest. The southern feature is forecast to 
close off and become the dominant wave, leading to a surface low 
tracking across southern Illinois into central Indiana. 

Elevated warm air advection and large-scale ascent in the right 
entrance region of an upper jet will result in widespread rain 
Tuesday morning into the evening, along and behind a cold front. 
With the strongest vorticity max passing well to our south, the 
heaviest rain is forecast to set up to our south and east -- 
across central Illinois into Indiana. Locally, model consensus has
additional rainfall after 7 AM Tuesday in the 0.25" to 1.00" 
range, from along the Mississippi R. into the far eastern
counties. The heaviest amounts (0.50"+) are forecast east of a 
line from Sterling to Macomb. Due to the rain, northwest winds, 
and cloud cover, high temperatures are only forecast to reach the 
50s.

Mid to Late Week: The upper level pattern is expected to 
transition into a split flow through the rest of the week. Models 
have the primary jet and storm track remaining across southern to 
central Canada, and a cut-off low traversing through the Southern 
Rockies into the Southern Plains/Gulf Coast. This pattern will 
lead to seasonable temperatures in the 50s and mostly dry conditions.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1243 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions will be seen through 18z/24 as a storm system moves
east from the Plains. After 00z/24 isolated to scattered SHRA are
expected with the possibility of an isolated TSRA. The probability
of a TSRA impacting a TAF site is around 10 percent. Additionally,
LLWS will develop again with sunset and continue through sunrise
Monday. Starting close to 18z/24 a large band of rain will 
develop across eastern Iowa with conditions deteriorating to MVFR 
that will slowly spread east through 00z/25.

&&

.DVN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IA...NONE.
IL...NONE.
MO...NONE.
&&

$$

SYNOPSIS...08
SHORT TERM...08
LONG TERM...Uttech
AVIATION...08
