FPFJ40 NFFN 212100
Weather Bulletin
Issued from the National Weather Forecasting Centre Nadi
at 10:45am on Saturday the 22nd of October 2022

A STRONG WIND WARNING REMAINS IN FORCE FOR THE LAND AREAS OF YASAWA
GROUP, KADAVU AND NEARBY SMALLER ISLANDS, LAU AND LOMAIVITI GROUP.

Situation :  A weak trough of low pressure with associated cloud and
rain affects the eastern and northern parts of the country.
Meanwhile, a high pressure system to the far southeast of Fiji
directs a fresh to strong southeast wind flow over the Fiji group. 
Forecast to midnight tomorrow for the Fiji group:
Over land areas of Yasawa group, Kadavu and nearby smaller islands,
Lau and Lomaiviti group: 
Strong southeast winds with an average speed of 45km/hr. Rough seas.
For the rest of the country : Moderate to fresh southeast winds.
Moderate to rough seas.
Occasional rain over the greater Suva/Nausori-Tailevu, Naitasiri &
Serua-Namosi, Kadavu and nearby smaller islands, Lau and Lomaiviti
groups, Cakaudrove and southern Bua. Elsewhere, fine apart from
afternoon and evening showers. Isolated afternoon thunderstorms and
heavy falls likely. 
Isolated heavy falls may lead to flash flooding of low lying areas. 


Outlook for Monday     : Strong southeast winds with speeds up to
45km/hr expected over land areas of Yasawa group, Kadavu and nearby
smaller islands, northern Ra, Lau and Lomaiviti group.  Rogh seas.
Elsehwere, moderate to fresh southeast southeast winds. Moderate to
rough seas.
Occasional rain over the greater Suva/Nausori-Tailevu, Naitasiri &
Serua-Namosi, Sigatoka-Korolevu, Kadavu,  Lau and Lomaiviti group,
Cakaudrove and southern Bua. Elsewhere, fine apart from isolated
afternoon or evening showers. Isolated afternoon thunderstorms and
heavy falls likely. Isolated heavy falls may lead to flash flooding
of low lying areas. 

For Navua / Suva / Nausori :
Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Monday     : Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls
likely. 

For Sigatoka / Coral coast: 
Occasional rain over the Coral Coast. Fine apart from isolated
afternoon showers about Sigatoka. Isolated heavy falls likely. 
Outlook for Monday : Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls likely.

For Nadi / Lautoka / Ba :
Fine apart from isolated afternoon or evening showers. Isolated
afternoon thunderstorms and heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Monday     : Fine apart from afternoon or evening
showers. Isolated afternoon thunderstorms and heavy falls likely.

For Tavua / Rakiraki :
Fine apart from afternoon or evening showers. Isolated afternoon
thunderstorms and heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Monday : Fine apart from afternoon or evening showers.
Isolated afternoon thunderstorms and heavy falls likely.

For Labasa :
Fine apart from afternoon or evening showers and thunderstorms.
Outlook for Monday     : Fine apart from afternoon or evening showers
and thunderstorms.

For Savusavu : Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Monday     : Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls
likely.

For Lau / Lomaiviti group: 
Expect fresh to strong winds with average speed of 45km/hr from
today. 
Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Monday : Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls likely.
Strong winds continuing.

For Kadavu:
Expect fresh to strong winds with average speed of 45km/hr from
today. 
Occasional rain. Isolated heavy falls likely.
Outlook for Monday : Showers becoming frequent. Strong winds
continuing. 

For Rotuma : Situation: A trough of low pressure lies in the vicinity
of Rotuma. Associated cloud and showers expected to affect the
island.

Occasional showers and isolated thunderstorms.
Moderate to fresh easterly winds. 
Moderate seas.
Outlook for Monday     : Showers and thunderstorms continuing.