FXUS61 KCLE 212318
AFDCLE

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Cleveland OH
718 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Dry and warmer weather will persist across the area through
Monday as high pressure sits over the eastern United States. A
cold front will pass through our area on Wednesday, bringing 
the next best bet for rain. High pressure builds in from the
west behind the frontal passage by the end of next week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY NIGHT/...
Not much to talk about in the near term forecast other than the 
warm and dry conditions this weekend due to high pressure ridging 
across the eastern CONUS. We've been efficiently mixing down higher 
wind speeds this afternoon in addition to a tightening pressure 
gradient. This has allowed for areas to be rather breezy, 
generally seeing gusts between 20 and 25 mph. Winds will 
gradually decrease this evening as we lose daytime heating. 

Clear conditions tonight with lows in the mid to upper 40s. Broad 
southwesterly flow will aid in a gradual warm up this weekend. Highs 
on Saturday are anticipated to range between the mid 60s to mid 70s, 
about 10 degrees warmer than average. Expect for another day of 
breezy conditions tomorrow as daytime heating will allow for mixing 
of higher wind speeds down toward the surface. Although we have
been breezy and dry today, southwesterly flow advects higher 
dewpoints into our region by Saturday afternoon. This will cut 
off any fire weather concerns for the weekend with minimum RH 
values ranging between 40 and 50 percent for Saturday.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SUNDAY THROUGH MONDAY NIGHT/...
A low to no impact upper trough axis in the southwesterly flow 
passes Sunday, keeping any potential shower activity to the west of 
the CWA. Amplifying low pressure system churns over the midwestern 
states, with the surface low tracking into the northern plains 
region. This will effectively keep our area in the warm sector 
regime for the end of the weekend and into the beginning of next 
week with 500mb heights over 580dkm. Southern stream upper low 
becomes the dominant feature over the southern plains region, and 
that will bring the next chances for rain into the area for the long 
term period. Temperatures will continue to be around 10 degrees 
above normal Sunday and Monday.

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Upper low tracks from the lower Mississippi Valley into the Ohio 
Valley mid week, filling in the process. POPs creep back into the 
fold for Wednesday, but the weakening low pressure system may result 
in a lower coverage of showers as the system moves through the 
region into the St. Lawrence Valley. The passing frontal system will 
only bring temperatures back towards normal for the end of the week 
with high pressure over southern Canada.

&&

.AVIATION /00Z Saturday THROUGH Wednesday/...
VFR across the TAF sites with VFR conditions to persist through
the TAF period under mostly clear skies. South to southwest 
winds will persist at 10 to 15 knots through the TAF period with
perhaps some brief wind gusts to 20 knots tomorrow afternoon. 
Have kept the LLWS mention at TOL/FDY late this evening and
overnight as southwest winds of 40 to 45 knots 2kft are expected
to develop above weak to modest (~10 knots) surface-level south
to southwest winds.

Outlook...VFR conditions are expected this weekend into early
next week.

&&

.MARINE...
Southerly winds in control 10-20kts thanks to high pressure off the 
New England coast, turning southeasterly Sunday in persistent 
offshore flow. Wave heights near shore will be less than a foot, but 
will increase fairly quickly away from shore. Southeasterly winds 5-
15kts Sunday through Tuesday night ahead of a cold front with 
northerly winds in its wake Wednesday.

&&

.CLE WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OH...None.
PA...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Iverson
NEAR TERM...Iverson
SHORT TERM...26
LONG TERM...26
AVIATION...Kahn
MARINE...26
