FXUS61 KILN 220220
AFDILN

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wilmington OH
1020 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure will offer warm and dry conditions through this 
weekend into early next week. Next chance of rain arrives Tuesday 
night into Wednesday with arrival of next area of low pressure.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM SATURDAY MORNING/...
Dry conditions are expected through the near term with just some
high clouds overnight. Low temperatures will generally be in the
upper 30s to middle 40s.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM SATURDAY MORNING THROUGH SATURDAY NIGHT/...
H5 ridging will shift off to the east on Saturday leaving modest 
westerly flow aloft. The next disturbance remains well back to the 
west, so warm and dry weather will likely continue through the day 
into Saturday night as well.

&&

.LONG TERM /SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Broad SW flow aloft will become established in the OH Vly for this 
weekend, even as a weakening S/W moves into wrn parts of the region 
Saturday night into Sunday. This system should provide nothing more 
than an increase in mid/high level cloud cover Sunday morning, but 
that will do little to temper the anomalously warm airmass that will 
have settled into the region by then.

Daily high temps will generally be 10-12 degrees above seasonal 
norms Sunday through the first part of the next workweek, with lows 
generally 7-9 degrees above normals during this period as well. This 
is due, in part, to persistent S/SW sfc flow that will evolve Sunday 
through Tuesday ahead of the next system, which will eventually 
impact the OH Vly toward midweek of next week. With this pattern 
setting up for the better part of 3-4 days in total, generally 
tranquil weather conditions are expected until we get into late 
Tuesday/Wednesday of next week. This weekend's pattern will be 
characterized by periodic sun and clouds and very mild temps as we 
head into the final full week of October. If mid/high level clouds 
can stay far enough W during the daytime on Monday, a few locales 
could have temps push into the upper 70s by the afternoon as LL 
moisture once again mixes out, promoting a very dry airmass locally. 
So with the persistent S/SW sfc flow, favorable diurnal mixing, and 
an abundance of LL dry air, temps should rebound efficiently for 
both the Sunday and Monday diurnal cycles. As of right now, standing 
daily record highs (81 at Cincinnati and 82 at Columbus/Dayton) on 
Monday seem safe.

While confidence remains high in the progression of a front through 
the area /sometime/ toward the middle of next week and beyond, there 
remains lower confidence regarding the timing of such an evolution. 
This makes PoPs -- and corresponding cloud cover and temp trends -- 
a bit tricky from a fcst perspective, especially for Tuesday. The 
trends continue to suggest a slightly slower progression of the 
system from the lower MS Rvr Vly into the OH Vly Tuesday night into 
Wednesday, suggesting that the daytime on Tuesday may remain mostly 
dry area-wide (especially in central/south-central OH and NE KY). 
There continues to remain good ensemble spread in the T 
distributions from Tuesday through Wednesday, showing the 
variability that exists in the solution envelopes. While temps were 
bumped up a few degrees once again for Tuesday, and PoPs were once 
again nudged a bit slower/lower during the daytime, did not make 
wholesale/drastic changes to the blend at this time. But 
nevertheless, the trends have shown a slower progression of the 
system into the area, indicating a drier Tuesday for most would be 
favored.

It does seem like the system will finally make a push into the 
region by Tuesday night into Wednesday, even as the overall system 
begins to weaken/fill. But Tuesday night into Wednesday appears to 
be the best day for widespread pcpn locally throughout the entirety 
of the long term period, with above normal temps continuing until 
that frontal passage takes place. A return to a cooler pattern will 
evolve by late in the workweek, but temperatures will still be near 
normal for this time of the year.

&&

.AVIATION /02Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
VFR conditions are expected through the TAF period. Winds will
continue to decrease for the overnight hours before additional
wind gusts develop for the afternoon hours on Saturday. Expect
some high clouds around at times through the TAF period, with
some cu also possible during the day on Saturday.

OUTLOOK...No significant weather expected.

&&

.ILN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OH...None.
KY...None.
IN...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...
NEAR TERM...Novak
SHORT TERM...
LONG TERM...KC
AVIATION...Novak
