FXUS64 KMEG 212341
AFDMEG

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Memphis TN
641 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...New AVIATION...

.DISCUSSION...
(This evening through next Thursday)
Issued at 315 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Fast, zonal flow aloft will back to the southwest through the 
early part of next week. Near the surface, this will result in a 
relatively tight pressure gradient, with occasionally gusty 
southwest winds. Increased nighttime mixing and influx of modified
maritime air from the gulf will lead to mild nights and warm 
days, leading up to the arrival of a compact southern branch 
closed low. 

Midsouth rain chances will increase by Monday night, under strongly
diffluent flow aloft. By this time,a plume of precipitable water 
values will near 1.7 inches will extended northward through the
lower MS River valley and Midsouth. Medium range models continued
to depict modest instability, with MUCAPE at or below 300 J/kg. 
This appears reasonable, given somewhat stacked nature of the 
system, early time of day, and the likely amount of rainfall in 
advance of the forced line. In any case, some beneficial rainfall 
is expected through Tuesday evening.

The pattern remains active following Tuesday's upper low passage.
12z medium range models were in fair agreement with the passage of
another southern branch low late Friday into Saturday. Between
these two systems, seasonal temperatures and moderate dewpoints 
are forecast, which should lessen wildfire danger.

PWB

&&

.AVIATION...
(00Z TAFS)
Issued at 626 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Winds will be elevated for the next few hours. LLWS around 
40-45kts, still from the SSW, due to the intensification of the 
low- level jet. A few high clouds are expected with no ceiling or 
visibility concerns. Winds will remain elevated on Saturday as
well with VFR conditions prevailing. 

&&

.MEG WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AR...None.
MO...None.
MS...None.
TN...None.
&&

$$

PUBLIC FORECAST...PWB
AVIATION...MJH
