FXUS61 KCLE 231922
AFDCLE

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Cleveland OH
322 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
The region remains between high pressure over the Mid Atlantic 
and low pressure moving from the Rockies toward the Upper Midwest.
Low pressure and its associated cold front approach late Tuesday
and pass over the region Tuesday night into Wednesday. High 
pressure follows for Thursday and Friday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY NIGHT/...
The region remains between high pressure over the Mid Atlantic 
and low pressure moving from the Rockies toward the Upper
Midwest. This pattern will keep the warm and dry conditions 
going through Monday. Variable amounts of high level cloud cover
will continue to filter the sunshine during the day and may 
assist with keeping a couple spots a bit warmer overnight. 
Highs Monday look to be in the 70's. However a couple spots 
across NW OH may touch 80. Lows tonight and Monday night should
be about the same as last night with 40's to low/mid 50's anticipated.

&&

.SHORT TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY NIGHT/...
Upper level ridging stemming from the Gulf of Mexico begins to break 
down as the upper level low moves northeastward into the Ohio Valley 
Tuesday/Tuesday night. Models have honed in on the timing of the 
frontal passage associated with the upper level low. The front 
arrives overnight Tuesday into Wednesday, around 06Z, and quickly 
exits by late Wednesday afternoon. Some lingering lake enhanced 
showers can be expected across NE OH/NW PA behind the frontal 
passage given northwesterly flow. Dry air and high pressure move in 
behind the front, cutting off any lingering precipitation overnight 
Wednesday. Storm total QPF amounts generally lie between one quarter 
of an inch south and east of I-71 to half an inch, with locally 
higher values, in northwest Ohio. The frontal passage will drop 
temperatures back down closer to their seasonal values, generally in 
the low 60s for late October. 

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
Strong high pressure builds in behind the cold front, ushering in 
much drier air. High pressure drifts eastward across the Great Lakes 
region, keeping our area in light northeasterly/easterly flow. This 
results in cooler, but seasonable, weather late this week and into 
the weekend. Long range models are hinting at another low pressure 
system moving into our area from the Rockies next weekend. Future 
updates will narrow down timing, but current guidance indicates 
precipitation possible to round out the month of October.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z Sunday THROUGH Friday/...
VFR conditions are expected to continue through Monday 
afternoon with only variable amounts of high level cloud cover.
Southeast to south winds should remain between 4 and 12 knots.

Outlook...Non-VFR possible in showers Tuesday night and 
Wednesday as a cold front moves across the region.

&&

.MARINE...
Southerly flow at 15 knots or less will persist over the lake 
through Tuesday. Low pressure crosses Lake Erie Tuesday night into 
Wednesday, dropping a cold front across the lake. Winds shift and 
become westerly at 10-20 knots by Wednesday afternoon. High pressure 
builds in by Thursday giving way to northeasterly flow at 15 knots 
or less through the end of the week. Waves briefly build to 2-4 feet 
Wednesday night behind the front. 

&&

.CLE WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OH...None.
PA...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...MM
NEAR TERM...MM
SHORT TERM...Iverson
LONG TERM...Iverson
AVIATION...MM
MARINE...Iverson
