FXUS61 KCLE 231657
AFDCLE

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Cleveland OH
1257 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
The region remains between high pressure over the Mid Atlantic 
and low pressure moving from the Rockies toward the Upper Midwest.
Low pressure and its associated cold front approach late Tuesday
and pass over the region Tuesday night into Wednesday. High 
pressure follows for Thursday and Friday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
The region remains between high pressure over the Mid Atlantic 
and low pressure moving from the Rockies toward the Upper
Midwest. This pattern will keep the warm and dry conditions 
going through Monday. Variable amounts of high level cloud cover
will continue to filter the sunshine during the day and may 
assist with keeping a couple spots a bit warmer over night. 
Highs this afternoon and Monday look to be in the 70's. However 
a couple spots across NW OH may touch 80. Lows tonight should be
about the same as last night with 40's to low/mid 50's 
anticipated. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY NIGHT/...
Warm pattern continues through Tuesday with an upper level ridge 
extending across the eastern Great Lakes and deep southerly flow 
through the column. Unseasonably warm temperatures in the low to mid 
70s can be expected for another day but will have to contend with 
thickening high cloud so not expecting to be quite as warm as the 
weekend. Did continue to lean towards the warmer side of guidance as 
temperatures have tended to be slightly warmer than models 
anticipate.  

During the Tuesday\Tuesday night periods we will see the deep upper 
trough over the southern Plains curl northeast towards the Ohio 
Valley. Model trends over the last 24 hours have been slightly 
faster while also coming into better agreement. The airmass will be 
slow to moisten but strong mid-level moisture advection does arrive 
in NW Ohio Tuesday evening and pops quickly ramp up. Surface low 
pressure over Indiana will occlude ahead of the dynamic upper trough 
and rain will fill in as the front sweeps east overnight. Low 
pressure is expected to be near western Lake Erie by midday 
Wednesday and some breaks in the showers will wrap in from the 
south, while Toledo may remain under the influence of deformation 
showers on the western flank of the low. With this in mind, qpf 
values for this event range from around three quarters of an inch in 
NW Ohio to less than a quarter inch in the east. Temperatures on 
Wednesday will be near normal values as the cooler air wraps in with 
the front.

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY THROUGH SATURDAY/...
Low pressure will already be exiting northeast Quebec by Thursday 
morning with strong high pressure building over the Great Lakes 
Region. Moisture pulls away quickly with this system except for 
perhaps a shallow layer so Thursday is expected to be a dry day with 
partly cloudy skies. The airmass is not very cold with the ridge 
building aloft again, but we do hold onto northeast to easterly flow 
in the low levels which will keep temperatures near to just slightly 
below normal. As we approach next weekend we will be watching the 
evolution of an upper trough moving out of the Four Corners region. 
The 00Z/23 GFS favors more of an open wave while the Canadian 
depicts another closed low lifting towards the Ohio Valley. For now 
have low chance pops Friday night into Saturday but confidence 
decreases towards the end of the forecast.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z Sunday THROUGH Thursday/...
VFR conditions are expected to continue through Monday 
afternoon with only variable amounts of high level cloud cover.
Southeast to south winds should remain between 4 and 12 knots.

Outlook...Non-VFR possible in showers Tuesday night and 
Wednesday as a cold front moves across the region.

&&

.MARINE...
High pressure over the Appalachians will influence the eastern Great 
Lakes into Tuesday. Southerly winds will decrease today and could 
even see some lake breezes develop east of Cleveland this afternoon. 
Generally good marine conditions are expected through Tuesday with 
winds of 15 knots or less and above normal temperatures. Low 
pressure will cross Lake Erie on Wednesday, pulling a cold front 
across the lake with winds shifting to the north Wednesday night and 
northeast for Thursday as high pressure builds in north of the lake. 
Waves build to 2 to 4 feet behind the cold front on Wednesday
night.

&&

.CLE WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OH...None.
PA...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...MM
NEAR TERM...MM
SHORT TERM...KEC
LONG TERM...KEC
AVIATION...MM
MARINE...KEC
