FXUS61 KILN 231835
AFDILN

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wilmington OH
235 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Warm and continued dry conditions will persist through Monday. 
Showers will develop late Tuesday afternoon into Tuesday night 
as a low pressure system lifts northeast across the Ohio Valley.
Wet conditions will persist through early Wednesday before 
cooler and more seasonable conditions return for the remainder 
of the week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM MONDAY MORNING/...
With the thicker/more widespread cirrus having largely moved off
to the NE of the immediate local area, some diurnally-driven Cu
have developed in the wake of the cirrus. Otherwise, mainly
clear skies will persist into this evening before cirrus once
again overspreads the region for tonight into Monday morning.
The sunny skies, combined with the LL dry air, has helped temps
climb into the mid to upper 70s just about everywhere. Cannot
completely rule out a few 80-degree readings near the Tri- 
State during the peak of the diurnal cycle this afternoon. 

It will be another very tranquil and pleasant autumn evening
this evening as some cirrus filters in through tonight. This is
in response to some midlevel energy ejecting NE out of the mid 
MS Rvr Vly and across the OH Vly later tonight and through the 
day on Monday along the nose of an eastward-progressing 
midlevel ridge axis. With the maintenance of a tremendous amount
of dry air (both in magnitude and depth) through the lower 
reaches of the atmosphere, any measurable pcpn should stay off 
to the N/W of the ILN FA. Mild temps will bottom out in the 
mid/upper 40s to mid 50s, from E to W, respectively toward 
daybreak Monday.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM MONDAY MORNING THROUGH 6 PM MONDAY/...
Thicker cirrus will be overspreading the region through the
daytime on Monday, which lends itself to some uncertainty
whether high temps will get /quite/ as warm as they have gotten
today. Nevertheless, highs should still reach into the mid/upper
70s on Monday, but daily record highs at the local climate sites
appear to be safe. 

Increasingly-meridional flow aloft becomes established near/E 
of the MS Rvr Vly by late Monday into Monday night as the system
digs into the cntrl plains. This will means that dry conditions
persist for us through the short term period before a rare wet 
period evolves by later Tuesday into Wednesday as the weakening 
system ejects E into the OH Vly. Cloud cover will be on the 
increase from the W toward the end of the short term period. 
With the southerly sfc flow and patchy clouds, low temps Monday 
night will be  mild by seasonal standards, dipping into the low
to mid 50s area-wide. 

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY/...
Anomalous upper level ridging breaks down on Tuesday with the 
approach of an upper level shortwave and accompanying surface 
cyclone from the lower Mississippi River Valley. Despite southerly 
flow persisting ahead of the system all day on Tuesday, the best 
moisture plume does not arrive until Tuesday night. This will likely 
allow many locations, especially east of I-75, to remain dry until 
later in the day. Forecast highs reach into the middle 70s under 
increasing clouds. 

For Tuesday night, higher PWATs arrive and overlap with descent 
forcing ahead of the upper level shortwave and weak surface low 
leading to the expectation of widespread rainfall across the area. 
Forecast rainfall totals reach up to between 0.5 and 1 inch for many 
locations overnight into Wednesday morning. Forecast lows remain 
fairly mild Tuesday night- in the lower 50s to upper 40s. 

The best rain chances quickly come to an end on Wednesday morning as 
upper level forcing rapidly progresses east and a surface cold front 
pushes across the Ohio Valley behind the surface low. Although a few 
showers may linger into the afternoon on Wednesday with troughing 
overhead, expect a drying trend through the day from west to east. 
Winds shift to the northwest behind the front. Forecast highs drop 
back closer to seasonal averages- near 60. 

Surface high pressure builds in for Thursday and Friday leading to 
dry conditions and near average temperatures for the late October. 
The next chance for rain may arrive next weekend with another low 
pressure system being possible.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
The widespread/thick cirrus that moved through the OH Vly
overnight into early this morning continues to depart to the NE,
leaving in its wake mainly clear skies. We are seeing a few VFR
diurnally-driven Cu develop this afternoon, but coverage of 
this Cu should remain quite limited before dissipating once 
again toward sunset. 

S winds around 10-12kts, with gusts of 15-18kts, are expected
through late afternoon before going more out of the ESE at
around 5-7kts for the overnight. Cannot rule out some MVFR VSBYs
at KLUK once again during the predawn hours Monday as the weak
sfc flow direction will remain somewhat favorable for some BR 
development, even in spite of the very dry LL air that remains 
in place. 

Thicker/more widespread cirrus will once again overspread the
region, this time later in the overnight and into the daytime 
on Monday. Aside from the cirrus, skies will remain clear 
tonight through the remainder of the period. S winds increase to
around 10-12kts once again by Monday afternoon. 

Any precip chances associated with the disturbance moving 
through the region late tonight into Monday morning will remain 
well off to the NW of the local sites. 

OUTLOOK...MVFR CIGs possible Wednesday.

&&

.ILN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OH...None.
KY...None.
IN...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...KC
NEAR TERM...KC
SHORT TERM...KC
LONG TERM...Campbell
AVIATION...KC
