FXUS61 KILN 231721
AFDILN

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wilmington OH
121 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Warm and continued dry conditions will persist through Monday. 
Showers will develop Tuesday afternoon into Tuesday night as a 
low pressure system lifts northeast across the Ohio Valley. 
Cooler and more seasonable temperatures will then return for the
remainder of the week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 PM THIS EVENING/...
The thicker/more widespread cirrus that had filtered in
overnight continues to drift to the NE through the region.
However, a clearing trend is already noted on vis satellite in
the Tri-State, and expect clearing skies from SW to NE through
late morning into early afternoon, yielding mostly sunny to
sunny skies by mid afternoon just about everywhere. This,
combined with the LL dry air, will help temps climb into the
upper 70s. Could see a few 80-degree readings near the Tri-State
this afternoon with the abundant sunshine in place.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 PM THIS EVENING THROUGH 6 PM MONDAY/...
Mid level ridging will build into the upper Ohio Valley tonight
and then shift off to the east through the day on Monday. On the
backside of the ridge axis, some mid level energy will lift 
northeast out of the mid Mississippi Valley and across the lower
Ohio Valley later tonight and through the day on Monday. With 
the lower levels remaining dry, expect the main effect of this 
to primarily just be some increase in higher level clouds. Lows
tonight will be in the mid 40s to lower 50s with highs on 
Monday in the mid to upper 70s.

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY/...
Dry weather should continue Monday night as high pressure moves 
east. A rather potent low pressure system will be tracking from the 
southwest to the Great Lakes Tuesday through Wednesday. Latest model 
blend calls for widespread showers by Tuesday evening, diminishing 
Wednesday as drier air circulates in behind the low. Though very 
strong winds aloft will accompany the low, thunderstorms may be 
lacking due to the near absence of CAPE. 

Another stretch of dry weather is indicated for Wednesday night into 
Friday under high pressure. The next low arriving from the southwest 
will return the threat for showers Friday evening through Saturday.

Temperatures start well above normal in the persistently warm 
airmass ahead of the low, with highs reaching the 70s on Tuesday. 
Readings will drop closer to normal for the rest of the period as 
seasonally typical geopotential heights follow the low, with highs 
mainly in the 60s Wednesday through Saturday.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
The widespread/thick cirrus that moved through the OH Vly
overnight into early this morning continues to depart to the NE,
leaving in its wake mainly clear skies. We are seeing a few VFR
diurnally-driven Cu develop this afternoon, but coverage of 
this Cu should remain quite limited before dissipating once 
again toward sunset. 

S winds around 10-12kts, with gusts of 15-18kts, are expected
through late afternoon before going more out of the ESE at
around 5-7kts for the overnight. Cannot rule out some MVFR VSBYs
at KLUK once again during the predawn hours Monday as the weak
sfc flow direction will remain somewhat favorable for some BR 
development, even in spite of the very dry LL air that remains 
in place. 

Thicker/more widespread cirrus will once again overspread the
region, this time later in the overnight and into the daytime 
on Monday. Aside from the cirrus, skies will remain clear 
tonight through the remainder of the period. S winds increase to
around 10-12kts once again by Monday afternoon. 

Any precip chances associated with the disturbance moving 
through the region late tonight into Monday morning will remain 
well off to the NW of the local sites. 

OUTLOOK...MVFR CIGs possible Wednesday.

&&

.ILN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OH...None.
KY...None.
IN...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...JGL
NEAR TERM...KC/JGL
SHORT TERM...JGL
LONG TERM...Coniglio
AVIATION...KC
