FXUS63 KGID 212337
AFDGID

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Hastings NE
637 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...AVIATION UPDATE...

.DISCUSSION...(This evening through Friday)
Issued at 243 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Key Forecast Messages:

* Saturday Fire Weather:
  Possibly some sneaky fire weather concerns Saturday afternoon
  given high likelihood of RH values below 20 percent, but 
  fairly marginal winds maxing out around 20 mph. Winds could end 
  up being stronger than forecast due to deep mixing.

* Sunday Fire Weather:
  Sunday should be a solid Red Flag Warning day for at least
  southwest portions of our forecast area with wind gusts of 40 to
  50 mph and RH values bottoming out around or below 20 percent. 
  Have issued a Fire Weather Watch for now, which will likely be 
  upgraded to a Red Flag Warning as we get closer and may 
  potentially be expanded based on timing/location of dry line.

* Sunday Thunderstorms:
  Sunday late afternoon/evening thunderstorms could be strong to
  severe across our eastern zones. At this point its only a slight
  chance for thunderstorms, but if something does develop it could
  be severe. Moisture/instability will be limiting factor.

* Big Temperature Change: 
  We'll see abnormally warm high temperatures in the 80s this 
  weekend fall back into the 50s for most of next week.

Saturday and Sunday...
We'll have two warm days ahead of the next cold front.
Unfortunately although this is a big synoptic storm system it has
a poor track for us to see much in the way of rainfall and 
instead it will likely just be a big wind maker for most areas.
Instability is very marginal on Sunday with surface based CAPE
values of 500-1000 J/KG in our east. There will certainly be a lot
of wind shear with deep layer 0-6 km wind shear values around 60
kts and 0-1 km wind shear values over 30 kts. Models vary on if
convection will even develop and at this point the feeling is 
that any storms that develop will probably be rather isolated, but
potentially severe. See fire weather section below for more 
information on fire weather concerns.

Monday... 
The NBM is probably lingering too much of a chance for 
rain showers across our forecast area as most of any rain should 
be southeast of our area. Therefore, cut back on Monday POPs and 
QPF a bit, but likely needed to reduce even further.

Tuesday through Friday...
As already mentioned we will be much cooler. The main thing to
watch will be another storm system tracking through the plains on
Thursday and Friday, but the track of this system is still very
uncertain, but could give us at least some chance for much needed
moisture.


&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z KGRI/KEAR TAFS through 00Z Sunday)
Issued at 635 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR with no significant fire weather concerns through the period.
Winds will vary from SSE this eve, to SWrly Sat AM, then back to
Srly Sat aftn. Speeds will be 8kt or less, except for Sat aftn
when speeds peak at 10-12kt. Confidence: High. 

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 243 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Saturday...
There will be very deep mixing on Saturday, possibly 
all the way to 600 mb, but the wind will not be overly strong even
at 700 to 600 mb where southwest wind speeds will only be around 
15 to 20 kts. Therefore, even if we mix down some of these 
stronger wind we should keep most wind gusts under our 25 mph Red 
Flag Warning threshold, but it could be close. The RH values will
certainly be very low Saturday afternoon with most locations 
bottoming out between 10 and 20 percent. 

Sunday...
The wind will really crank up on Sunday as a deep surface low
tracks across Nebraska with an associated dry line that will
likely be situated over our forecast area. RH values behind the
dry line will fall to below 20 percent as the wind also takes on a
more southwesterly direction. Ahead of the dry line dewpoints
could climb into the 50s with much higher RH values and even the
possibility for a few evening thunderstorms along with a more
southerly wind component. There will likely be a tighter RH/dew 
point gradient along the dry line than we can indicate in our 
forecast. The wind will be very strong on Sunday with gusts of 
40-50 mph so the main limiting factor for a Red Flag Warning will 
be the higher RH values east of the dry line. May need to adjust 
which counties get the fire weather headline based on where this 
dry line sets up and how it shifts through the day on Sunday.

&&

.GID WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NE...Fire Weather Watch from Sunday afternoon through Sunday evening 
     for NEZ060-061-072>074-082>084.

KS...Fire Weather Watch from Sunday afternoon through Sunday evening 
     for KSZ005-006-017-018.

&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Wesely
AVIATION...Thies
FIRE WEATHER...Wesely
