FXUS63 KDTX 212245
AFDDTX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Detroit/Pontiac MI
645 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022


.AVIATION...

Dry low to mid level conditions will prevail this forecast period 
with just varying degrees of cirrus over the next 24 hours. South to 
southwest gradient flow will persist around 10 knots tonight with a 
stronger low level jet producing LLWS with southwest flow 40-45 kts 
peaking around 2kft. Steady southerly flow is expected Saturday with 
minor gusts 15-20 knots.

 DTW THRESHOLD PROBABILITIES...

* None.

&&

.PREV DISCUSSION...
Issued at 315 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

DISCUSSION...

Pleasant conditions have finally returned to SE MI today as this 
week's persistent upper level trough has slid east into northern 
Quebec with low amplitude ridging quickly following in its place. 
Ample sun and ongoing WAA under this ridge has aided temperature 
recovery from the cold morning start with the bulk of the region now 
sitting in the mid to upper 60s. Modest south-southwesterly flow 
continues through the night resulting in a milder night despite 
clear skies with lows only falling into the mid to upper 40s. 

Upper level ridging over the Great Lakes undergoes amplification 
this weekend as a potent upper trough digs into the Pacific 
Northwest and eventually the rest of the western CONUS. 850mb temps 
hold around 12-14C throughout this weekend with large scale 
subsidence limiting diurnal cloud development keeping skies mostly 
sunny. Resultant highs will be much above normal as temperatures top 
out in the low to mid 70s both days. Lows likely stay in the lower 
50s each night due to the combination of persistent southerly winds 
along with slightly more accompanying moisture in this airmass as 
dewpoints hold around 50. Western CONUS troughing reaches the Plains 
by early Monday leading to rapid development of surface low pressure 
over the northern Plains. Minimal impacts are expected locally with 
this system aside from a dry warm frontal passage as the low and 
supporting upper jet streak tracks north-northeast into 
Manitoba/western Ontario. 

Pattern change occurs Tuesday as a southern stream shortwave merges 
with the western CONUS trough resulting a release of the trough base 
into southern Plains and subsequent cyclogensis over the Red 
River/mid-Mississippi river valleys. Surface low pressure looks to 
ride the remnant cold frontal boundary (from the upper Plains low) 
sitting across the Mississippi valley northeast into the southern 
Great Lakes by Wednesday. Rain chances increase late Tuesday with 
the best potential for widespread rainfall coming latter half of 
Wednesday. A seasonable airmass then follows in this system's wake 
returning temperatures back to near normal for late October.

MARINE...

Strong warm advection pattern with southwest flow ahead of a cold 
from into tonight. But the stable low level profiles/limited mixing 
should help keep wind gusts mostly in the 20 to 25 knot range, and 
mainly focused over central and southern Lake Huron. No weather is 
expected along the front as it return north as a warm front over the 
weekend, with dry weather persisting. 

A strong low pressure system is expected to spin up late in the 
weekend over the Central Plains, but will be tracking well west of 
the Great Lakes region early next week. Thus, it appears possible 
winds will continue to remain under 25 knots with the warm advection 
pattern Monday as low level jet is over Western Great Lakes. The 
cold front/cold advection by mid week also looks subdued as well, 
but there should be good chance of rain showers.

&&

.DTX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MI...None.
Lake Huron...Small Craft Advisory until 10 AM EDT Saturday for LHZ421-422-441.

Lake St Clair...None.
Michigan waters of Lake Erie...None.
&&

$$

AVIATION.....DG
DISCUSSION...KDK
MARINE.......SF


You can obtain your latest National Weather Service forecasts online
at www.weather.gov/detroit.
