FXUS63 KGRR 212335
AFDGRR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Grand Rapids MI
735 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

LATEST UPDATE...
Aviation

.DISCUSSION...(This evening through next Friday)
Issued at 340 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

-- Sunny, Warm and Breezy Weekend -- 

Continued warm advection over the next few days ahead of an 
evolving cyclone in the lee of the Rockies will send high 
temperatures into the 70s. The air mass is very dry both overhead 
and upstream with sfc dew pts in the 30s extending from MI as far 
south as MO and TN. Much of the CONUS is cloud free and we should 
continue to have mainly clear skies through Sunday. Expect breezy 
southerly winds at times over the weekend, particularly during the
afternoon hours when deeper mixing is occurring.

-- Warmth Hangs on Early Next Week; Low Rain Chance -- 

Eventually a better influx of moisture off the Gulf takes place 
early next week as a weakening cold front associated with nrn 
Plains cyclone drifts farther east. This should result in an 
increase in cloudiness as well as the possibility of a few 
showers. Limiting factor will be the lingering dry air in the low 
levels so this may be more of a virga/sprinkle type of deal on 
Sunday night-Monday. 

The better chance of rain probably holds off until mid week when 
srn stream low moves northeast along stalled baroclinic zone. 
However even this system could underperform QPF-wise since the nrn
stream doesn't really phase in the with the energy passing 
through the Ohio Valley Rgn. Either way it does look like we cool
off behind that system but temps will still continue to average 
above normal behind it.

-- Longer Term Still Low Confidence -- 

Fcst confidence in the longer term still remains rather low as 
cluster analysis during the mid to late week period continues to 
offer differing scenarios on the H5 anomalies over the GrtLks Rgn.
It remains unclear where the mean longwave trough to our west 
will be and we may end up being more under the influence of the 
east coast ridging. Our temp fcst next Thur-Fri could need raised 
in future updates if this is the case. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 730 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

The surface winds will weaken this evening while the wind up
around 2k ft will remain strong. As a result an increased
potential for wind shear will exist at all sites tonight. The
gusty winds will resume Saturday morning and then persist for the
day. The atmosphere will be dry through a deep layer...thanks to
subsidence...so VFR weather is projected for the forecast period.



&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 340 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

For now will keep the 2 AM expiration of the Small Craft Advisory
as is since guidance continues to show a lull occuring later 
tonight into early Saturday. However if later updates of the HRRR 
and NAMNest do not back off then extensions will be needed. Either
way the winds pick up again Saturday afternoon into Sunday but 
with a slightly more offshore component (south-southeast wind 
direction). Gut feel is that advisories will be needed for the Lk 
MI nearshore most of the weekend. 


&&

.GRR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MI...None.
LM...Small Craft Advisory until 2 AM EDT Saturday for LMZ844>849.

&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Meade
AVIATION...MJS
MARINE...Meade
