FXUS62 KGSP 220009
AFDGSP

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Greenville-Spartanburg SC
809 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
The warming trend is expected to continue into the weekend with a 
return to more seasonal mid-fall temperatures. Warm and dry 
conditions continue into early next week before a weak frontal 
system brings a small chance of rain by mid-week. Warm and dry 
conditions return behind the front.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY/...
As of 802 PM EDT Friday: Another fair weather evening across 
the region. Once again, dewpt was running a bit lower than 
expected at some locations, so some minor adjustments were made 
to the RH trend.

Otherwise...low temps tonight won't be as cold as the past few 
nights and are expected to remain above freezing at most 
locations, although frost- producing temps are possible by the 
early morning across much of the CWA. An embedded upper 
shortwave trof will dig further SE thru the period and 
eventually morph into a closed h5 low just off the SE Coast by 
late Sat/early Sun. Meanwhile, sfc high pressure will allow for 
mostly clear skies and dry conditions across the region, despite
drifting further NE and weakening a bit. A slow rebound in 
thicknesses will allow for temperatures to continue their 
warming trend into the weekend, despite low- level winds 
favoring a NELY direction during the aftn/evening tomorrow. 
Highs tomorrow are expected to reach near-climo values, with our
southernmost zones likely to reach the low-70s by mid- 
afternoon. Otherwise, more dry and sunny wx is on tap for 
tomorrow.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SATURDAY NIGHT THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 130 PM EDT Friday: An upper ridge axis builds in from the west 
through Monday. An upper low spins up off the southeast coast Sunday 
and weakens as it moves north along the coast through Monday. At the 
surface, high pressure centered over the Northeast remains wedged 
over the area. The surface low that develops in response to the 
upper low slowly weakens as it stalls near the Carolina coast. East 
to northeast flow between the ridge of high pressure and the low 
will bring low level moisture into our area. However, the flow isn't 
very strong and isentropic lift and upslope flow also remain weak. 
Therefore, do expect an increase in cloudiness but no precipitation. 
Highs will be a few degrees above normal with lows starting out 
around 5 degrees below normal rising to a couple of degrees above 
normal.

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 145 PM EDT Friday: The upper ridge over the area Tuesday 
weakens as an upper low approaches from the west. The low turns NE 
and remains west of the spine of the Appalachians Wednesday. Nearly 
zonal flow develops Thursday with a short wave ridge for Friday as 
another upper low moves into the southern Plains. The surface high 
centered over the NE weakens Tuesday with light east to southeast 
flow developing as an occluded low pressure system moves into the 
mid-MS valley. The associated frontal system moves across the area 
Wednesday, weakening as it moves east. Can't completely rule out 
some light precip late Tuesday or Tuesday night, but chance is quite 
low given the shallow nature of the moisture and weak isentropic 
lift and upslope flow. A better chance of precip expected with the 
front Wednesday, but chance is still quite low given the upper 
forcing moving off to our northwest, lack of Gulf moisture inflow, 
and the weak front. Dry weather returns for Thursday and Friday with 
weak high pressure. Highs remain a few degrees above normal with 
lows up to 5 degrees above normal through the period as there is 
little to no cold air behind the front.

&&

.AVIATION /00Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
At KCLT and elsewhere: This looks like about the most innocuous
VFR forecast one will ever get around here, courtesy of sfc high
pressure. Basically sky clear through the period, with maybe a
few wisps of cirrus, and a light/variable wind through Saturday
morning, until perhaps a light wind develops from the NE around
midday. That light wind could veer around to SE occasionally at
KCLT late Saturday afternoon, but speeds will be 5 kt or less. As
for mtn valley fog/stratus, the air mass just looks too dry to
include restrictions at this time.

Outlook: Dry high pressure will keep predominately VFR conditions
in place thru the weekend and into early next week. Mtn valley
fog will become increasingly likely each morning.

&&

.GSP WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
GA...None.
NC...None.
SC...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...RWH
NEAR TERM...JPT/PM
SHORT TERM...RWH
LONG TERM...RWH
AVIATION...PM
