FXUS63 KLOT 231951
AFDLOT

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Chicago/Romeoville, IL
251 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...
Issued at 136 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Through Monday...

Strong southerly flow remains in place, with gusts of 35 to almost 
40 mph this afternoon. A 985 mb surface low is moving northeast 
through the central Great Plains, providing the tight pressure 
gradient creating these gusty winds. As has been the case for the 
past couple of days, this continued strong southerly flow is 
bringing up unseasonably warm temperatures. Cloud cover is expected 
to increase this afternoon, so temperatures will be a bit cooler 
today yesterday, but we'll still see temperatures in the upper 70s, 
and just a bit cooler near Lake Michigan. Gusty winds will remain 
throughout today, and although they will weaken somewhat after 
sunset, gusts of 25 to 30 mph will still be occurring throughout the 
night. Our dew points have jumped up from the upper 30s a couple of 
days ago into the 50s. This would normally reduce the fire threat, 
but the continued strong winds and continued dry fuel moistures will 
keep the risk of brush fires elevated, leading to the issuance of a 
special weather statement through this afternoon.

The surface low will track north-northeast towards eastern North 
Dakota today and tonight, dragging a warm front over my forecast 
area overnight. Showers are expected to develop this evening into 
overnight from the isentropic ascent. Isolated thunderstorm 
development cannot be ruled out with these showers, with a bit of 
elevated CAPE available. The better chance for both showers and 
thunder will be north of I-80, with chances decreasing as you head 
south. Chances for precipitation will drop off by Monday morning, 
although mostly cloudy skies are expected to remain throughout 
Monday. The continued strong southerly flow will lead to low 
temperatures of around 60, which is our normal high temperature for 
late October. High temperatures will be a bit cooler from today due 
to cloud cover, but we will still reach into the mid to upper 70s. 
Gusty winds remain, with continued gusts of 25 to 30 mph throughout 
Monday.

BKL

&&

.LONG TERM...
Issued at 251 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Tuesday through Sunday...

The primary weather messages during the extend period are:
- The shift towards a cooler weather pattern by Tuesday.
- The increasing likelihood for a good soaking rainfall event for
  most of the area Tuesday into Tuesday night.

A strong Autumn storm system shifting northward into the Dakotas
late this afternoon is expected to drive a cold front eastward
to near the Mississippi River into Monday evening. As this occurs,
rain chances are expected to begin to quickly ramp up to our west
and southwest as a strong southern stream impulse now digging 
into the Desert Southwest begins to eject eastward across the 
Texas Panhandle. While this threat of rain is likely to remain 
west of our area during the daylight hours on Monday, we will 
begin to see rain chances ramping up from west to east over 
northern IL Monday night into early Tuesday morning. 

Model and ensemble forecast guidance continue to be in decent
agreement with the idea of this southern stream impulse becoming
negatively tilted and supporting the consolidation of a new a
area of surface low pressure over the Ozarks into the day on
Tuesday. Once this occurs, an east-northeastward progression of 
the surface low will be favored along the remnant cold frontal 
boundary moving into IL. The surface low track is thus favored to 
progress from southern parts of MO midday Tuesday, east- 
northeastward across southern IL and into parts of the Lower Great
Lakes into early Wednesday morning. This particular track 
supports the idea of a prolonged period of rain Tuesday through 
Tuesday night within a south-southwest to north-northeastward 
oriented low to mid level deformation band. Current forecast
guidance suggests that this corridor may set up around, or a bit 
east of, the I-55 corridor Tuesday and Tuesday night. However, its
actual placement will be dependent on the actual track the storm 
system takes into Wednesday morning. Nevertheless, it looks like 
most areas will experience a soaking rain during this period. The
heaviest axis of rainfall that occurs could result in 2"+ amounts
for some areas of eastern IL into northwestern IN, especially 
given the fact that precipitable water values could approach 
1.5". While this is impressive, given the ambient dry conditions 
across the area it appears unlikely this would result in any 
significant hydro issues.

The pattern behind this system (Wednesday onward) is advertised 
to be fairly progressive. There are multiple short wave 
disturbances forecast in guidance, as well as again somewhat of a 
split flow pattern. This provides little room to try to tweak the 
NBM solution PoPs with have some low chances for next weekend. 
Temperatures in such a pattern look to be fairly flat-line for 
highs during the days and near climatology based on 850 mb and 925
mb temperatures forecast compared to late October climatology.

KJB

&&

.AVIATION...
For the 18Z TAFs...

Aviation concerns through the TAF period include:

* Gusty south/southeast winds through this evening with crosswind
  thresholds within reach at ORD

* Scattered high-based showers and even a thunderstorm this
  evening (no vis/cig disruptions)

* Resumption of breezy south/southwest winds during daylight hours 
  Monday

South to southeast winds continue to gradually increase in
magnitude this afternoon in response to a tight pressure gradient
and broad low-level jet across the Mississippi River Valley. 
Confidence is high in a wind direction of 170 to 180 degrees with 
gusts of 30-35kt from 18-01Z at all terminals. A few gusts of 
35-40kt cannot be ruled out particularly between 21-00Z this 
evening and indeed during a period of peak aircraft volume as a 
low-level jet intensifies overhead. Even as mixing heights 
gradually lower after sunset, the intense low-level jet will 
support a continuation of gusts of 25-30kt overnight. Given the 
expectation for surface winds and gusts to remain elevated 
overnight, LLWS will not be advertised in the outgoing TAF 
package. 

Broad low-level warm-air advection beneath a plume of steep mid- 
to upper-level lapse rates currently extending from central
Missouri to central Illinois will expand to northern Illinois and
northwestern Illinois this evening. Moistening of a mid-level dry
layer will eventually give way to scattered high-based showers
perhaps as early as 00Z but more likely after 04Z. After 
collaboration with CWSU ZAU, opted to convert the inherited PROB30
groups into TEMPO groups at all terminals with an expectation for
widely scattered / discontinuous coverage of showers through the
overnight hours. Note that a thunderstorm or two cannot be ruled 
out given the overlap of the mid-level unstable layer within 
seasonably cool temperatures supportive of charge separation. 
Indeed, a few flashes of lightning have already been observed 
across Missouri and far southwestern Illinois earlier this 
morning. At this point, coverage of thunder is expected to be too 
low to warrant a formal mention in the TAFs though a bumpy ride 
may nevertheless occur for any aviator flying through a shower
overnight. Cigs and visbys should remain VFR beneath any cell. 

Showers will taper in coverage toward daybreak and give way to a
continuation of gusty winds after daybreak. Wind directions 
should adopt a modest westerly component tomorrow with medium 
confidence in directions of 180 to 190 degrees. 

Borchardt

&&

.LOT WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IL...None.
IN...None.
LM...Small Craft Advisory...nearshore waters until 7 AM Monday.

&&

$$

Visit us at weather.gov/chicago

Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube at:
www.facebook.com/NWSChicago
www.twitter.com/NWSChicago
www.youtube.com/NWSChicago
