FXUS63 KILX 232042
AFDILX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Lincoln IL
342 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Issued at 245 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Warm and breezy southerly winds will continue across IL through 
Monday. Lows overnight will be around 60 in eastern IL, and mid 
60s over the IL river valley. Highs Monday will reach 75 to 80 
degrees. Most areas should remain dry through Monday, with a 
chance of showers west of the IL river late Monday afternoon as 
clouds increase on Monday. Widespread showers and isolated 
thunderstorms will spread in from the west during Monday night and
Tuesday as a storm system moves into IL. Between 1 and 2 inches 
of rain is likely over the area by late Tuesday night. Locally 
higher amounts are possible east of the IL river and west of I-57.
Highs Tuesday to range from the mid to upper 50s west of the IL 
river, to around 70 in southeast IL.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday)
ISSUED AT 300 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Mid afternoon surface map shows strong 985 mb low pressure over 
central Nebraska, while 1029 mb high pressure was over eastern
Maine and ridging across the Atlantic States. Very tight pressure
gradient over IL today with strong southerly winds 20-30 mph and
gusts of 30-45 mph. Strongest winds appear to be in eastern IL
this afternoon. Champaign recently had wind gust of 47 mph with 
Mattoon gusting to 41 mph. A broken band of 5-10k ft clouds was
spreading ne into central IL and more over I-74 at mid afternoon.
Radar mosaic shows isolated shower south of Pittsfield and
weakening as it moves ne. This cell had a few lightning strikes
when it was over MO. More widespread convection was over western
MO into far ne KS and central IA. 

Latest CAMs continue to show isolated showers and thunderstorms
possibly clipping northern CWA from mid evening into early 
overnight while better chances to be further north over nw and 
northern IL tonight. Breezy SSE winds and some passing cloud 
cover to keep it quite mild for a late Oct night. Lows around 60 
in eastern IL and mid 60s over the IL river valley. 

Another warm and breezy day on Monday with south winds gusts to 30
mph and more cloud cover expected than today. Highs in the mid 
70s over the IL river valley and around 80F in southeast IL. 
Strong low pressure to lift north of MN by mid day Monday while a 
deep southern stream system moves into the southern plains. A cold
front to push into eastern IA and central MO by late Monday 
afternoon with chance of showers moving into areas west of the IL 
river late Monday afternoon toward supper time. Brunt of CWA 
should stay dry during the day Monday. 

&&

.LONG TERM...(Monday night through Sunday)
ISSUED AT 315 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Southern stream system to eject surface low pressure ne into the
Ozarks late Monday night and track into sw IL early Tue evening.
This storm system will have moisture from remnants of hurricane
Roslyn that is lifting ne into central Mexico late today and
tracking into Texas during Monday. Widespread band of rain showers
to spread eastward across CWA during Monday night though may not
get into eastern IL until Tue morning. PW values rising to
1.5-1.75 inches to support heavier rains setting up from late 
Monday night into Tue with 1-2 inches projected over CWA by late 
Tue night, with locally higher amounts east of the IL river and 
west of I-57. Highs Tue to range from 55-60 from IL river west to
around 70F se of I-70. SPC day3 keeps risk of severe storms south
of IL on Tuesday where better instability/higher dewpoint air will
be.

Cutoff upper level low lifts into the central Ohio river valley by
dawn Wed and to eastern tip of Lake Erie by sunset Wed, with brunt
of its showers shifting east of IL with clouds decreasing over
central/se IL late Tue night and Wed morning as high pressure
moves into the eastern Plains. Breezy nw winds advect in cooler 
air Wed with highs in the upper 50s over central IL and around 60F
in southeast IL. 

Dry conditions expected Wed night through Friday over the area as
high pressure moves into the central Great Lakes by sunset Thu and
remains over the Great Lakes into Friday while ridging back into
central IL. Wed night will be the coolest night with lows in the
upper 30s to near 40 degrees.  

Extended models show a southern stream cutoff low moving into
Texas by Friday afternoon/evening and into the lower MS river
valley Sat night. Still some differences in how far north its
precipitation shield will get Fri night and Saturday. GFS and
Ecmwf keeps qpf south of CWA Fri night through Sat night while 
GEM brings in qpf on Sat afternoon and Sat night. Thinking we
should still be dry Fri night and then have small chances of
showers Sat afternoon into Saturday night. Not much change in
temperatures with highs mainly in the upper 50s/lower 60s Thu
through next weekend. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1245 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Wind will again be the forecast concern during this 24 hour TAF 
forecast for central IL airports as VFR conditions continue with
scattered to broken clouds from 6-12k ft. Strong south winds 
18-25 kts with gusts 28-35 kts this afternoon to veer SSE this 
evening and slowly weaken 5-10 kts by late evening. Strong low
level jet sets up again tonight over central IL, and added LLWS 
starting 03-04Z and going until 09-10Z with 1.5-2k ft SSW winds 
45-50 kts. Isolated convection possible this evening from I-74 
north but coverage too limited to mention in TAFs as better 
coverage to be north of PIA during mid/late evening. South to SSE 
winds 13-18 kts with gusts to 22-27 kts Monday. 

&&

.ILX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NONE.

&&

$$

SYNOPSIS...07
SHORT TERM...07
LONG TERM...07
AVIATION...07
