FXUS63 KILX 231749
AFDILX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Lincoln IL
1249 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Issued at 346 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Warm and breezy conditions continue through Monday with the 
strongest winds being this afternoon as gusts approach 40 mph at 
times. Shower and isolated storm chances return later tonight north 
of I-72, but better chances hold off until Monday night into Tuesday 
night as a cold front works through the area. 

&&

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1050 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Added slight chance of a shower and possible a thunderstorm sw 
CWA this morning from Jacksonville to Terre Haute sw. These
isolated showers has been weakening as it lifts ne into our SW 
CWA during mid to late morning. Otherwise rest of forecast is left
intact as strong south winds already gusting 30-40 mph will 
continue this afternoon and a bit higher in a few spots. 
Champaign, Decatur and Mattoon have gusted to 41 mph in past 1-2 
hours. Mid level clouds spreading ne into sw CWA at late morning 
to spread ne over rest of CWA during this afternoon with some 
scattered VFR base cumulus clouds appearing. Unseasonably warm 
highs in the upper 70s to near 80F this afternoon. Drier air 
(lower dewpoints and RH values) near the Wabash river valley will 
pose a heightened fire danger due to very dry ground, warm 
temperatures and strong southerly winds. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today and tonight)
ISSUED AT 346 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

An active weather pattern is currently brewing over a large portion 
of the CONUS as a large scale upper trough over the northwest US 
deepens and spreads east over the next several days. Continued near-
record warmth, breezy winds, limited fire danger, and eventually 
much needed rainfall will be the main impacts here locally over the 
next several days.

A few subtle shortwaves ahead of the main trough are working through 
the southwest flow anchored over the country's midsection late 
tonight. Further west, a deepening surface low currently located 
over eastern CO will lift northeast into the northern Plains states, 
further tightening the pressure gradient here locally. Windy 
conditions will continue with the highest winds expected by this 
afternoon as gusts approach 35-40 mph in spots. Temperatures will 
once again be warmer than normal today, though more cloud cover 
should keep values a degree or two below Saturday's highs. Although 
dewpoints continue to rise ahead of system, a limited risk for 
fire danger will be present today due to strong winds, warm 
temperatures, and very dry fuels. It is recommended to refrain 
from outdoor burning today.

Small chances for showers and perhaps a rumble of thunder return 
later today into tonight north of I-72 as a warm front associated 
with the aforementioned low lifts through the area. Isolated showers 
and storms may linger through the overnight hours, though a lull 
should commence closer to daybreak. Overnight lows will be mild once 
again with values likely remaining in the upper 50s to low 60s. We 
may even tie or break a few record warmest low temperatures for 
October 23. Here are the standing record warmest lows for today at 
our climate sites: Peoria 61 (2000), Springfield 64 (2012), Lincoln 
61 (1920).

.LONG TERM...(Monday through Saturday)
ISSUED AT 346 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The upper trough of note will continue to shift east on Monday as it 
phases into a northern and southern stream. The northern shortwave 
and associated surface low will lift into southern Manitoba/Ontario 
by midday Monday with a cold front stretched southward from there 
into the desert southwest. Further south, the southern stream 
shortwave will spin up a surface low late Sunday night over the 
southern Plains and lift northeast along the cold front early this 
week. Mostly dry conditions will are expected during the daytime 
hours of Monday until the cold front spreads into the area Monday 
night. Decent moisture will lift northward ahead of the wave with 
PWATs expected to peak in the 1-2" range... a lot of this coming 
from the future remnants of Hurricane Roslyn. The brunt of the 
precipitation will occur on Tuesday as the surface low lifts through 
the area, with the center looking to track somewhere in the vicinity 
of the I-70 corridor. Continued with the mention of thunder on 
Tuesday mainly across eastern and southeast IL where a few hundred 
J/kg of CAPE may be present. Despite the strong wind shear that will 
be in place, the threat for severe weather will remain south of the 
area where better dewpoints will be.

Shower and storm chances look to continue through Tuesday night 
before ceasing on Wednesday morning. Although deterministic guidance 
has come into better agreement with the track and timing of the 
surface low, the placement of the heaviest precipitation in the 
deformation area is still a little fuzzy. Probabilistic guidance 
continues to suggest a 60-70%+ chance that most areas will see at 
least a 0.50" of rainfall with this event. Higher rain amounts look 
most likely across our south/southwest counties within the
vicinity of the I-55 corridor or just east of there where 1-2"+ 
could fall. Either way, any rainfall amount received will be 
beneficial to our very dry landscape across the state as most 
areas are experiencing rainfall deficits of 1-2" so far this 
month. We are not expecting flooding to be a concern with this 
event because 1) we need the rainfall and 2) lack of convection 
should keep rainfall rates below the inflated FFG values.

The shortwave and associated surface low will lift northeast into 
the eastern Great Lakes Region by Wednesday as high pressure settles 
in behind it. Temperatures will return to seasonable values, which 
are in the upper 50s to low 60s for late October. The upper pattern 
remains progressive through the end of the week with another NW US 
originated shortwave looking to dive southeast toward the southern 
Plains states on Friday. There remains differences on the track and 
strength of this system, with additional precipitation chances 
possible here by late week or weekend. Still have several days to 
hash this out, especially after our more impactful early week 
system. Therefore, let the blended forecast guidance handle this 
timeframe of forecast period.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1245 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Wind will again be the forecast concern during this 24 hour TAF 
forecast for central IL airports as VFR conditions continue with
scattered to broken clouds from 6-12k ft. Strong south winds 
18-25 kts with gusts 28-35 kts this afternoon to veer SSE this 
evening and slowly weaken 5-10 kts by late evening. Strong low
level jet sets up again tonight over central IL, and added LLWS 
starting 03-04Z and going until 09-10Z with 1.5-2k ft SSW winds 
45-50 kts. Isolated convection possible this evening from I-74 
north but coverage too limited to mention in TAFs as better 
coverage to be north of PIA during mid/late evening. South to SSE 
winds 13-18 kts with gusts to 22-27 kts Monday. 

&&

.ILX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NONE.

&&

$$

UPDATE...07
SYNOPSIS...NMA
SHORT TERM...NMA
LONG TERM...NMA
AVIATION...07
