FXUS63 KLOT 231731
AFDLOT

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Chicago/Romeoville, IL
1231 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...
Issued at 319 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Through Monday...

A deep upper-level trough continues to take shape across the western 
CONUS this morning with a strong 987 mb surface low being analyzed 
over northeastern Colorado and southwestern Nebraska. The trough is 
expected to deepen as it pushes eastward into the central plains 
later today which will push the surface low northeastward into the 
northern plains and upper Midwest. This will place northeastern 
Illinois and northwest Indiana in the robust warm air advection wing 
that will aid in keeping temperatures abnormally warm for this time 
of year. Temperatures are already starting off in the low to mid-60s 
this morning and will warm into the mid to upper 70s this afternoon. 
Winds will also be increasing in speed today as the pressure 
gradient tightens ahead of the low and the atmosphere mixes into 40+ 
kt winds aloft allowing gusts to reach in the 30 to 35 mph range 
this afternoon with a few higher gusts possible especially towards 
this evening as the low-level jet develops. 

As the trough pushes into the central plains, an area of showers and 
thunderstorms is expected to develop across central and eastern Iowa 
this evening which are expected to gradually lift north and east 
into northern Illinois and southern Wisconsin through the late 
evening and overnight hours. While the bulk of the precipitation 
will be in the form of showers, forecast soundings are continuing to 
show that some marginal elevated instability would develop across 
portions of northern Illinois which may allow for some isolated 
rumbles of thunder this evening into the early overnight hours. I 
have continued to maintain a slight chance mention for thunder in 
the forecast for the majority of the CWA, but I suspect that the 
best chances for any isolated storms would be areas along I-39 and 
north of I-80. 

Showers are expected to lift north of the area by Monday morning 
leaving the area with dry conditions until a strong cold front 
begins to bring showers into the area late Monday afternoon into the 
evening. Otherwise, another unseasonably mild and breezy today is on 
tap for Monday with highs in the mid-70s and wind gusts around 25 
mph. 

Yack

&&

.LONG TERM...
Issued at 319 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Monday night through Saturday...

The primary weather messages in the extended are:

* Temperatures shifting back to seasonal normals on Tuesday

* Period of soaking rain probable at some point within the Monday
  night through Tuesday night timeframe, with a strongest signal
  of this along/east of I-55, where there is potential for 1.5
  inches or more; yet at the same time, it's still possible the
  heavier rain from this system misses the area entirely

By Monday night, the general western U.S. trough will be
progressing eastward across the Plains, with more of a split flow
jet stream accompanying this and starting to favor the southern 
stream closed circulation by Tuesday. As this slow translation 
eastward occurs Monday night, the moist conveyor belt (PWATs ~1.4 
to 1.5 inches) is forecast to inch its way eastward over the 
Mississippi River Valley Monday night with broad upper ascent 
favoring rain showers within this moist axis. Have continued high 
PoPs, especially overnight into Tuesday morning. The signal for 
over a half inch west and southwest of Chicago by midday Tuesday 
is seen in about ~40 percent of 00Z GEFS and ECE members.

By midday Tuesday, the southern stream wave is expected to 
acquire a negative tilt as it enters the Lower Mississippi Valley,
and this is forecast to lift northeastward Tuesday night. Fairly 
strong jet support, both from the subtropical branch and even
help from the northern stream, will result in intensification of 
the surface low and moisture transport pull. The result is a 
developing baroclinic leaf over the general Illinois and Indiana 
region. Despite this being relatively compact on the synoptic
scale, it does look good for some efficient rainfall and 
potentially scattered elevated thunderstorms making it a ways 
northeast of the surface low center. However, there is notable 
spread in where the northeast track is in that general Illinois 
and Indiana region. There remains a group of models that have a 
clustered solution far enough southeast of the area later Tuesday 
into Tuesday night that it keeps the forecast area out of the 
system's more efficient rainfall swath entirely. The others 
largely at least clip the area or even bring it right over the 
central part of the forecast area including Chicago, bringing a
cool, soaking rainfall Tuesday afternoon into evening.

In QPF discussion with WPC and WFO ILX, we felt the National 
Blend of Models (NBM) offered a reasonable solution that didn't 
wash things out and had a placement of the > 1 inch amounts along
and east of I-55. Upper end potential of 2.5 inches (such as the 
00Z GFS advertised) is there, but could be some arcs of convection
over the Lower Ohio to Lower Mississippi Valley that rob some of 
the moisture transport, which was another reason did not feel 
comfortable going that high with QPF at this time. The antecedent
dry conditions will help in the case we do overperform on rainfall,
and feel the WPC excessive rainfall risk on the low end (1 of 5) 
for Tuesday and Tuesday night covers things well. Will largely 
mirror that idea in local messaging.

Temperatures on Tuesday should see little climb from the very mild 
start in the morning as the surface cold front moves eastward 
into the area, and as mentioned above clouds and probable rain 
showers too will thwart much of a diurnal climb.

The pattern behind this system (Wednesday onward) is advertised 
to be fairly progressive. There are multiple short wave
disturbances forecast in guidance, as well as again somewhat of a
split flow pattern. This provides little room to try to tweak the
NBM solution PoPs with have some low chances for next weekend. 
Temperatures in such a pattern look to be fairly flat-line for 
highs during the days and near climatology based on 850 mb and 925
mb temperatures forecast compared to late October climatology.

MTF

&&

.AVIATION...
For the 18Z TAFs...

Aviation concerns through the TAF period include:

* Gusty south/southeast winds through this evening with crosswind
  thresholds within reach at ORD

* Scattered high-based showers and even a thunderstorm this
  evening (no vis/cig disruptions)

* Resumption of breezy south/southwest winds during daylight hours 
  Monday

South to southeast winds continue to gradually increase in
magnitude this afternoon in response to a tight pressure gradient
and broad low-level jet across the Mississippi River Valley. 
Confidence is high in a wind direction of 170 to 180 degrees with 
gusts of 30-35kt from 18-01Z at all terminals. A few gusts of 
35-40kt cannot be ruled out particularly between 21-00Z this 
evening and indeed during a period of peak aircraft volume as a 
low-level jet intensifies overhead. Even as mixing heights 
gradually lower after sunset, the intense low-level jet will 
support a continuation of gusts of 25-30kt overnight. Given the 
expectation for surface winds and gusts to remain elevated 
overnight, LLWS will not be advertised in the outgoing TAF 
package. 

Broad low-level warm-air advection beneath a plume of steep mid- 
to upper-level lapse rates currently extending from central
Missouri to central Illinois will expand to northern Illinois and
northwestern Illinois this evening. Moistening of a mid-level dry
layer will eventually give way to scattered high-based showers
perhaps as early as 00Z but more likely after 04Z. After 
collaboration with CWSU ZAU, opted to convert the inherited PROB30
groups into TEMPO groups at all terminals with an expectation for
widely scattered / discontinuous coverage of showers through the
overnight hours. Note that a thunderstorm or two cannot be ruled 
out given the overlap of the mid-level unstable layer within 
seasonably cool temperatures supportive of charge separation. 
Indeed, a few flashes of lightning have already been observed 
across Missouri and far southwestern Illinois earlier this 
morning. At this point, coverage of thunder is expected to be too 
low to warrant a formal mention in the TAFs though a bumpy ride 
may nevertheless occur for any aviator flying through a shower
overnight. Cigs and visbys should remain VFR beneath any cell. 

Showers will taper in coverage toward daybreak and give way to a
continuation of gusty winds after daybreak. Wind directions 
should adopt a modest westerly component tomorrow with medium 
confidence in directions of 180 to 190 degrees. 

Borchardt

&&

.LOT WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IL...None.
IN...None.
LM...Small Craft Advisory...nearshore waters until 7 AM Monday.

&&

$$

Visit us at weather.gov/chicago

Follow us on Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube at:
www.facebook.com/NWSChicago
www.twitter.com/NWSChicago
www.youtube.com/NWSChicago
