FXUS61 KRNK 231810
AFDRNK

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Blacksburg VA
210 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Mild and dry weather is expected for much of the upcoming week 
with temperatures above normal, thanks to high pressure. Low 
pressure off the Mid Atlantic will bring increasing clouds to
eastern Virginia into Monday. A frontal system will bring the 
next chance of rain to the immediate area Wednesday. A wedge of
high pressure builds in Thursday into next weekend, bringing 
cooler weather.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 140 PM EDT Sunday...

...High pressure holds with warm temperatures...

The overall weather pattern will change little over the next 24 
hours or so over the southern Appalachians. A surface low over 
the northern Plains will begin to fill as a large upper low over
the intermountain west shifts east. To our east, a trough 
stretched from the Ohio Valley to off the NC/SC Carolinas 
coasts. In between, high pressure held and was keeping our area 
dry. 

Clouds associated with the low off the coast have crept in, but
will mainly affect areas near Hot Springs, WV to Danville, VA 
to Yanceyville, NC and east. More scattered but widespread 
clouds are possible overnight, but still no rain. Dew point do 
increase, especially south and east of the Blue Ridge, while the
mountains stay drier. Thus only a small chance for fog again 
over valleys and bodies of water. Tonight lows will be in the 
mid 30s to mid 40s. The offshore low will continue to drift 
northeast and away from us overnight. 

On Monday a sharp ridge builds overhead and will again keep us
dry with highs in the upper 60s to mid 70s areawide. Have 
trimmed back clouds coming in from the west tomorrow as expect 
the mid level ridge to hold moisture back a little longer. 

Forecast confidence is high through the near term.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY NIGHT/...
As of 105 PM EDT Sunday...

High pressure across the region will slowly move eastward Monday 
night. The upper ridge across our area will slide east towards 
the Atlantic ocean Tuesday. A cold front will approach us from 
the west Tuesday into Tuesday night. Southwest flow will 
continue to increase ahead of the front. This should at least 
allow afternoon temperatures to rise into mid/upper 60s and low 
70s across the area on Tuesday/Wednesday.

Best forcing will go north of the area so likely to see a mainly
dry frontal passage through the area on Wednesday/Wednesday 
night. Scattered showers can still be expected though, with the 
best chance along and west of the Blue Ridge.

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
As of 115 PM EDT Sunday...

High pressure is expected to build in again behind the front 
Thursday into Friday leading to clear, drier and cooler
conditions. Friday into Saturday, low pressure organizes along
the Gulf coast, which will increase clouds and rain chances for
the latter half of next weekend.

Temperatures are expected to remain near normal through the long 
term forecast period.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 150 PM EDT Sunday...

VFR conditions expected through the TAF valid period, with some
increase in mid and high clouds. Winds will be mainly light and
variable winds.

Forecast confidence = high.

Extended Aviation Discussion...  

VFR conditions will prevail through Tuesday. An upper-level 
trough and associated frontal system will skirt the region from 
the west/northwest by Wednesday into Wednesday night with a few
showers possible mainly west of the Blue Ridge. VFR conditions 
continue for Thursday through Friday with gusty northerly winds
developing as high pressure wedges against east-facing terrain.
Late night/early morning fog chances will increase by Tuesday
morning, especially for LYH and DAN where dew point depressions
will be smaller. 

&&

.RNK WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
VA...None.
NC...None.
WV...None.

&&

$$

SYNOPSIS...SH
NEAR TERM...SH
SHORT TERM...BMG
LONG TERM...BMG
AVIATION...SH
