FXUS61 KAKQ 231848
AFDAKQ

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wakefield VA
248 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Coastal low pressure slowly lifts north off the Carolina and mid
Atlantic coast through tonight, bringing rain to coastal areas.
Low clouds and a chance for rain may linger into Monday 
afternoon along the coast. Mainly dry and warmer conditions are 
expected Tuesday through Thursday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 240 PM EDT Sunday...

The latest sfc analysis indicates ~1012mb sfc low pressure 
system centered off the coast from NC to southeast VA, with 
~1030mb sfc high pressure centered along the coast of Maine. The
low off the coast is slowly lifting to the N with the upper low
lagging a bit to the W/SW (across the ern NC coastal Plain).
Strong SSE flow offshore has allowed moisture to increase right
at the immediate coast, SPC mesoanalysis indicating PWATs of 
1.60 to 1.70" at the NC coast, rapidly diminishing to ~1.00" 
along the I-95 corridor. 

Measurable QPF has shown a sharp gradient near the coast with
0.25" to 0.50" on avg observed from ECG to VA Beach rapidly
dropping to <0.10" at ORF. As the sfc low continues N late this
evening, expect the precip coverage to become highest across 
the eastern shore, though rain will still be likely across far 
SE VA/NE NC through late aftn. Additional QPF will be light W of
Ches Bay, with locally another 0.25-0.50" across the eastern 
shore. Given the low clouds making it all the way to the I-95 
corridor and low level CAD, highs this aftn will mainly be in 
the lower 60s, though a few places may struggle to reach 60F and
the far west will top out at 65-70F. 

The trends are significantly wetter for tonight and even on
Monday as the GFS/NAM both depict the sfc low becoming centered
just offshore of the NC/VA coast this evening, lingering along 
the eastern shore into Monday. The GFS is actually now the 
slower model (NAM lifts the sfc feature out by midday Monday 
while the GFS stacks it with height, keeping the sfc low over 
the eastern shore into Mon night). Either way, have made some
changes, adding slight chc for tstms this evening over the
eastern shore where there may even be some modest instability
and better mid level lapse rates moving in from the coast for a
few hrs. Have increased clouds tonight through midday Monday 
all areas, with at least chances for rain along the eastern 
shore through early Mon aftn. Lows tonight upper 40s/lower 50s
along and W of I-95, with mid to upper 50s at the coast. 

Mainly cloudy E and cloudy but becoming partly sunny west on 
Monday. Highs in the low 70s W and mid-upper 60s E due to the 
thicker cloud cover.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
As of 320 AM EDT Sunday...


Tue-Wed looks to be dry and following a warming trend. A front 
will pass through the area Wednesday as low pressure passes SE 
of the Great Lakes on its way to eastern Canada, but precip 
looks to stay west and north of the local area. Highs in the mid
70s Tuesday, then upper 70s on Wednesday. Lows in the upper 
40s-low 50s Monday and Tuesday, low-mid 50s Wednesday.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SATURDAY/...
As of 320 AM EDT Sunday...

A little cooler behind the front and dry Thu into Fri, then as 
strong high pressure builds into northern New England and Atlantic 
Canada next weekend, the onshore flow increases and will have a 25-
35% PoP and mostly cloudy skies Sat. Highs in the lower 70s Thu, 
upper 60s-low 70s Friday and in the 60s Sat (low 70s in NC). Lows in 
the 50s Thursday morning, mid 40s to low 50s Friday, and in the 50s 
Sat.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 200 PM EDT Sunday...

Strong high pressure (~1030mb) centered along the coast of Maine
with ~012mb sfc low pressure off the VA/Carolina coast is
bringing low clouds and IFR/LIFR flight restrictions to the
coast and MVFR-IFR CIGs as far west as the I-95 corridor. N
winds are ~15kt gusting to ~25kt at the coast and ~10kt well
inland. RA/DZ has also mixed in at the coast and a few brief heavier
showers are now pushing through far SE VA and NE NC. Most of the rain
diminishes this evening, but flight restrictions are expected to
prevail for much if not all of the 18Z/23 TAF period, with the 
most consistent IFR- LIFR at the coast and ern shore (especially
ORF and SBY). At RIC, MVFR is expected to be predominant into 
this evening but IFR becomes more likely overnight/early Mon. 
Slowly improving conditions on Monday, but it may not be until
the aftn when the lower clouds scour out. 

Generally dry Mon night through Thu but there may be some 
lingering low clouds through Tue morning near the coast. 

&&

.MARINE...
As of 120 PM EDT Sunday...

High pressure is centered over Nova Scotia this afternoon while
a broad coastal low is centered off the coast of SC. The 
pressure gradient along the Mid-Atlantic coast has tightened, 
allowing for N winds 15-25 kt with gusts 25-30 kt over the Ches
Bay, coastal waters, and Currituck Sound. The Lower James is
more marginal at 15-20 kt with gusts to 25 kt while the rest of
the rivers are mainly 10-15 kt with occasional gusts to 20 kt.

Winds will gradually increase into this evening as the coastal 
low continues to deepen as it tracks northward. Model 
consistency has been lacking with respect to the track/strength 
of the low (which has an impact on wind speeds over the marine 
area). Nevertheless, the highest winds are still expected to 
occur from late this afternoon-early evening as the low becomes
centered ~100 miles east of the Atlantic coast of VA. Have 
raised forecast wind speeds by a few knots given that the low 
track appears to be closer to the local area (and also the fact 
that it will be stronger than appeared yesterday). Wind speeds 
will peak around 25 kt (w/ gusts of 30-35 kt) on the ocean, with
speeds as high as 20-25 kt on the bay (and gusts of ~30 kt). 
The highest winds will likely be over the MD coastal waters. 
Will not go with a Gale Warning given that wind probs have
dropped to ~22%. Therefore, will keep the going SCAs and 
mention occasional 30-35 kt gusts in the MWW. With the 
persistent N wind, seas will build to 6-9 ft today. Waves on 
the bay will build to 3-5 ft (highest at the mouth). Winds 
gradually diminish to 15 kt by Mon morning, but 5 ft+ seas will
likely linger into Mon. SCAs have been extended until 6 AM 
Mon for the Currituck Sound, 10 AM Mon for the Ches Bay, and 1 
AM Mon for the Lower James. SCAs remain in effect until 4 PM Mon
for the coastal waters due to seas remaining elevated. High 
pressure moves back in behind the low, with sub- SCA conditions 
expected on Tue/Wed. Another round of SCAs is possible late in 
the week as winds potentially increase out of the N-NE (most 
likely on the ocean due to increasing seas).

&&

.AKQ WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MD...None.
NC...None.
VA...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 10 AM EDT Monday for ANZ630>632-634.
     Small Craft Advisory until 6 AM EDT Monday for ANZ633.
     Small Craft Advisory until 1 AM EDT Monday for ANZ638.
     Small Craft Advisory until 4 PM EDT Monday for ANZ650-652-654-
     656-658.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...LKB
NEAR TERM...LKB
SHORT TERM...AM
LONG TERM...AM/LKB
AVIATION...AM/LKB
MARINE...ERI/RMM
