FXUS61 KAKQ 231722
AFDAKQ

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wakefield VA
122 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Coastal low pressure slowly strengthens off the Carolina coast 
and continues to lift north off the mid Atlantic coast through 
tonight, bringing light rain to coastal areas. Clearing and mild
behind the system for the first half of the upcoming week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 1145 AM EDT Sunday...

The latest sfc analysis indicates an elongated sfc low pressure
system centered off the coast from SC to southeast VA, with
~1030mb sfc high pressure centered along the coast of Maine. The
low off the coast is nearly vertically stacked with the upper
low lagging to the W closer to the Carolina coast. This pattern
has led to some weak CAD with reduced VSBYs and drizzle/light
rain slowly spreading inland from the coast. SPC mesoanalysis
indicates PWATs around 1.60" at the NC coast, rapidly
diminishing to <1.00" closer to the I-95 corridor. 

Measurable QPF has been confined to within about 15 miles of the  
the coast and across all of eastern shore (and has been only a 
few hundredths thus far). As the sfc low drifts north later 
this aftn, expect the precip coverage to pick up a bit over 
the eastern shore (as it is now over NE NC and Va Beach). Still
not expecting much more than 0.10-0.20". As for highs today,
lowered them by a few degrees given the low clouds making it all
the way to the I-95 corridor. Will have highs mainly between
60-65F, though a few places may struggle to reach 60F and the
far west may reach into the mid-upper 60s.  

Precip will taper off on the northern Eastern Shore overnight. 
With the tightening pressure gradient between the low and high 
pressure centers, it will be breezy near the coast with a few 
gusts upwards of 30mph. 

Mainly dry on Mon as the sfc low drifts farther to the N/NE, but
a lot of clouds stick around, especially for the eastern 1/2 of
the area. Highs on Monday in the low 70s W and mid-upper 60s E
due to the thicker cloud cover.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
As of 320 AM EDT Sunday...


Tue-Wed looks to be dry and following a warming trend. A front 
will pass through the area Wednesday as low pressure passes SE 
of the Great Lakes on its way to eastern Canada, but precip 
looks to stay west and north of the local area. Highs in the mid
70s Tuesday, then upper 70s on Wednesday. Lows in the upper 
40s-low 50s Monday and Tuesday, low-mid 50s Wednesday.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SATURDAY/...
As of 320 AM EDT Sunday...

A little cooler behind the front and dry Thu into Fri, then as 
strong high pressure builds into northern New England and Atlantic 
Canada next weekend, the onshore flow increases and will have a 25-
35% PoP and mostly cloudy skies Sat. Highs in the lower 70s Thu, 
upper 60s-low 70s Friday and in the 60s Sat (low 70s in NC). Lows in 
the 50s Thursday morning, mid 40s to low 50s Friday, and in the 50s 
Sat.

&&

.AVIATION /17Z SUNDAY THROUGH THURSDAY/...
As of 645 AM EDT Sunday...

High pressure is centered near over New England as of latest sfc
analysis, and extends to the SW into the Mid-Atlantic. 
Meanwhile, low pressure is centered off the Southeast coast.
Conditions are quickly deteriorating this morning with
ORF/ECG/SBY already in IFR. Clouds continue thicken and lower 
today, putting most terminals in IFR for most of the day.
Meanwhile, MVFR will be relatively short-lived at RIC. There is
a 40-60% chc of rain at SBY, PHF, ORF, and ECG, and only 20-30%
at RIC. Periodic MVFR vsby is possible in rain near the coast. 
The wind will generally become NNE 5-10kt overnight, and then 
increase to 10-15kt, with gusts to 20-25kt along the coast 
today. IFR/MVFR is expected to persist overnight along the 
coast, but could see CIGs starting to lift at ECG/ORF/PHF by the
end of the period. 

Rain chances continue into the evening, primarily over the 
Eastern shore. Thunder chcs looks very limited and should mainly
stay offshore. Generally dry and VFR Monday- Thursday, but 
there may be some lingering low clouds through Monday morning.

&&

.MARINE...
As of 120 PM EDT Sunday...

High pressure is centered over Nova Scotia this afternoon while
a broad coastal low is centered off the coast of SC. The 
pressure gradient along the Mid-Atlantic coast has tightened, 
allowing for N winds 15-25 kt with gusts 25-30 kt over the Ches
Bay, coastal waters, and Currituck Sound. The Lower James is
more marginal at 15-20 kt with gusts to 25 kt while the rest of
the rivers are mainly 10-15 kt with occasional gusts to 20 kt.

Winds will gradually increase into this evening as the coastal 
low continues to deepen as it tracks northward. Model 
consistency has been lacking with respect to the track/strength 
of the low (which has an impact on wind speeds over the marine 
area). Nevertheless, the highest winds are still expected to 
occur from late this afternoon-early evening as the low becomes
centered ~100 miles east of the Atlantic coast of VA. Have 
raised forecast wind speeds by a few knots given that the low 
track appears to be closer to the local area (and also the fact 
that it will be stronger than appeared yesterday). Wind speeds 
will peak around 25 kt (w/ gusts of 30-35 kt) on the ocean, with
speeds as high as 20-25 kt on the bay (and gusts of ~30 kt). 
The highest winds will likely be over the MD coastal waters. 
Will not go with a Gale Warning given that wind probs have
dropped to ~22%. Therefore, will keep the going SCAs and 
mention occasional 30-35 kt gusts in the MWW. With the 
persistent N wind, seas will build to 6-9 ft today. Waves on 
the bay will build to 3-5 ft (highest at the mouth). Winds 
gradually diminish to 15 kt by Mon morning, but 5 ft+ seas will
likely linger into Mon. SCAs have been extended until 6 AM 
Mon for the Currituck Sound, 10 AM Mon for the Ches Bay, and 1 
AM Mon for the Lower James. SCAs remain in effect until 4 PM Mon
for the coastal waters due to seas remaining elevated. High 
pressure moves back in behind the low, with sub- SCA conditions 
expected on Tue/Wed. Another round of SCAs is possible late in 
the week as winds potentially increase out of the N-NE (most 
likely on the ocean due to increasing seas).

&&

.AKQ WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MD...None.
NC...None.
VA...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 10 AM EDT Monday for ANZ630>632-634.
     Small Craft Advisory until 6 AM EDT Monday for ANZ633.
     Small Craft Advisory until 1 AM EDT Monday for ANZ638.
     Small Craft Advisory until 4 PM EDT Monday for ANZ650-652-654-
     656-658.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...LKB
NEAR TERM...LKB
SHORT TERM...AM
LONG TERM...AM/LKB
AVIATION...AJZ/AM
MARINE...ERI/RMM
