FXUS61 KAKQ 232017
AFDAKQ

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wakefield VA
417 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Coastal low pressure slowly lifts north off the Carolina and mid
Atlantic coast through tonight, bringing rain to coastal areas.
Low clouds and a chance for rain may linger into Monday 
afternoon along the coast. Mainly dry and warmer conditions are 
expected Tuesday through Thursday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 240 PM EDT Sunday...

The latest sfc analysis indicates ~1012mb sfc low pressure 
system centered off the coast from NC to southeast VA, with 
~1030mb sfc high pressure centered along the coast of Maine. The
low off the coast is slowly lifting to the N with the upper low
lagging a bit to the W/SW (across the ern NC coastal Plain).
Strong SSE flow offshore has allowed moisture to increase right
at the immediate coast, SPC mesoanalysis indicating PWATs of 
1.60 to 1.70" at the NC coast, rapidly diminishing to ~1.00" 
along the I-95 corridor. 

Measurable QPF has shown a sharp gradient near the coast with
0.25" to 0.50" on avg observed from ECG to VA Beach rapidly
dropping to <0.10" at ORF. As the sfc low continues N late this
evening, expect the precip coverage to become highest across 
the eastern shore, though rain will still be likely across far 
SE VA/NE NC through late aftn. Additional QPF will be light W of
Ches Bay, with locally another 0.25-0.50" across the eastern 
shore. Given the low clouds making it all the way to the I-95 
corridor and low level CAD, highs this aftn will mainly be in 
the lower 60s, though a few places may struggle to reach 60F and
the far west will top out at 65-70F. 

The trends are significantly wetter for tonight and even on
Monday as the GFS/NAM both depict the sfc low becoming centered
just offshore of the NC/VA coast this evening, lingering along 
the eastern shore into Monday. The GFS is actually now the 
slower model (NAM lifts the sfc feature out by midday Monday 
while the GFS stacks it with height, keeping the sfc low over 
the eastern shore into Mon night). Either way, have made some
changes, adding slight chc for tstms this evening over the
eastern shore where there may even be some modest instability
and better mid level lapse rates moving in from the coast for a
few hrs. Have increased clouds tonight through midday Monday 
all areas, with at least chances for rain along the eastern 
shore through early Mon aftn. Lows tonight upper 40s/lower 50s
along and W of I-95, with mid to upper 50s at the coast. 

Mainly cloudy E and cloudy but becoming partly sunny west on 
Monday. Highs in the low 70s W and mid-upper 60s E due to the 
thicker cloud cover.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
As of 400 PM EDT Sunday...

Given the slower trends, will maintain slight chc PoPs Mon night
for the eastern shore, with partly-mostly cloudy skies
elsewhere. Lows mainly ranging through the 50s. Tue- Wed looks 
to be mainly dry with a warming trend, although the overall 
upper level pattern is not projected to have as much of a well 
defined ridge over the local area as prior model runs. This
leads to a lower confidence forecast as the GFS/NAM/ECMWF now 
keep the main upper ridge W of the local area on Tue with a weak
trough aloft still over the region. Will have partly-mostly 
cloudy skies Tue with highs 70-75F. Lows in the 50s Tue night,
then partly-mostly sunny Wed ahead of a front as low pressure 
passes SE of the Great Lakes on its way to eastern Canada. Precip
looks to stay west and north of the local area for the most
part. Highs in the mid to upper 70s Wednesday.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY/...
As of 415 PM EDT Sunday...

A little cooler behind the front and dry Thu into Fri with highs
in the mid/upper 60s to lower 70s. Then as strong high pressure
builds into northern New England and Atlantic Canada next 
weekend, the onshore flow increases. The models have trended 
farther south (for now) with respect to the position of the sfc 
high next Sat- Sun (into the NE CONUS/northern mid- Atlantic 
rather than New England/eastern Canada). The NBM is actually 
higher with PoPs than the GFS or ECMWF. Will keep 15-25% PoPs 
in for Sat/Sun most areas but the operational models would 
suggest a dry pattern until late Sunday when moisture lifts N 
from the Gulf of Mexico. Temperatures will be seasonably cool 
with highs in the 60s and lows in the 40s/50s. 

&&

.AVIATION /20Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 200 PM EDT Sunday...

Strong high pressure (~1030mb) centered along the coast of Maine
with ~012mb sfc low pressure off the VA/Carolina coast is
bringing low clouds and IFR/LIFR flight restrictions to the
coast and MVFR-IFR CIGs as far west as the I-95 corridor. N
winds are ~15kt gusting to ~25kt at the coast and ~10kt well
inland. RA/DZ has also mixed in at the coast and a few brief heavier
showers are now pushing through far SE VA and NE NC. Most of the rain
diminishes this evening, but flight restrictions are expected to
prevail for much if not all of the 18Z/23 TAF period, with the 
most consistent IFR- LIFR at the coast and ern shore (especially
ORF and SBY). At RIC, MVFR is expected to be predominant into 
this evening but IFR becomes more likely overnight/early Mon. 
Slowly improving conditions on Monday, but it may not be until
the aftn when the lower clouds scour out. 

Generally dry Mon night through Thu but there may be some 
lingering low clouds through Tue morning near the coast.

&&

.MARINE...
As of 320 PM EDT Sunday...

High pressure is centered between Nova Scotia and coastal New 
England this afternoon while two areas of low pressure are centered 
off the coast (one off of the Outer Banks and another of of the SC 
coast). The pressure gradient along the Mid-Atlantic coast remains 
tight, allowing for N winds 15-25 kt with gusts 25-30 kt over the 
Ches Bay, coastal waters, and Currituck Sound. The Lower James is 
more marginal at 15-20 kt with gusts to 25 kt while the rest of the 
rivers are mainly 10-15 kt with occasional gusts to 20 kt.

Winds will gradually increase a few knots late this afternoon into 
this evening as the coastal low continues to deepen as it tracks 
northward. SCAs are in effect until 6 AM Mon for the Currituck 
Sound, 10 AM Mon for the Ches Bay, 1 AM Mon for the Lower James, and 
4 PM Mon for the coastal waters (due to seas remaining elevated). 
High pressure moves back in behind the low Mon into the middle of 
the week with sub- SCA conditions expected on Tue/Wed. A cold front 
moves through Wed night with winds becoming N 15-20 kt. Winds 
gradually become NNE/NE and increase to 15-25 kt (possibly higher) 
Fri-Sun with another round of SCAs for winds and waves/seas possible 
as the pressure gradient tightens between high pressure over far SE 
Canada/ New England and a coastal low near Bermuda.

Waves and seas are 3-5 ft (4-6 ft for the mouth of the bay) and 6-9 
ft respectively this afternoon. Waves and seas subside to 2-3 ft and 
4-5 ft respectively by early Mon afternoon, subsiding to 1-2 ft and 
3-4 ft by Mon evening as high pressure builds back in and winds 
diminish.

&&

.AKQ WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MD...None.
NC...None.
VA...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 10 AM EDT Monday for ANZ630>632-634.
     Small Craft Advisory until 6 AM EDT Monday for ANZ633.
     Small Craft Advisory until 1 AM EDT Monday for ANZ638.
     Small Craft Advisory until 4 PM EDT Monday for ANZ650-652-654-
     656-658.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...LKB
NEAR TERM...LKB
SHORT TERM...AM/LKB
LONG TERM...AM/LKB
AVIATION...AM/LKB
MARINE...RMM
