FXHW60 PHFO 220145
AFDHFO

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Honolulu HI
345 PM HST Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...

Showers will expand in coverage over Windward Big Island and Maui
tonight. Breezy trades return for Saturday and continue through
next week.

&&

.DISCUSSION...

Deep moisture and convergent southerly flow associated with the 
remnant frontal zone currently positioned west of the islands is 
steadily losing its grip on Kauai as evidenced by showers over and 
near the island diminishing in coverage this afternoon. The parent 
low will transition to an open wave during the next 24 hours before 
ultimately being absorbed by the westerlies on Sunday. During this 
time, the remnant frontal band will continue to edge westward, its 
departure marked by a to SE or ESE flow over Kauai tonight. For Oahu 
through western Maui, dry southeasterly flow portending a return to 
typical trade wind wind weather will ensure limited cloud and shower 
coverage for the remainder of the daylight hours. 

Regional satellite and model analysis indicate a well-defined low-
level trough currently approaching the Big Island, the lead of 
clouds and showers now spreading onshore in the Puna District. This 
trough is nestled along the boundary between prevailing southeast 
flow over the islands and the building easterly trades. As increased 
low-level convergence and deeper moisture move onshore, showers will 
increase in coverage over Windward Big Island and Maui this evening 
through at least the first half of tonight. As this feature departs 
westward coincident with building mid-level ridging aloft, breezy 
trade winds (moderate around Kauai), will return to the state 
tonight into Saturday. A typical breezy trade wind weather pattern 
will then continue for the balance of the forecast period.

&&

.AVIATION...

This afternoon, a weak surface trough continues to enhance shower
activity and cloud cover over Kauai and adjacent waters. Later
this evening through tonight, a band of moisture moving towards 
the state from the east will bring showery conditions and lower 
clouds, especially across windward sections of the Big Island. 
Elsewhere, showers will remain more isolated. Easterly trade winds
will gradually increase statewide over the next 24 hours, 
reaching breezy levels by Saturday afternoon.

Currently, there are no AIRMETS in effect, though an AIRMET 
for mountain obscuration may be needed over windward Maui and Big
Island later this evening or tonight as shower activity increases.

&&

.MARINE...

The boundary near Kauai, will continue to weaken as it slowly 
drifts further westward through tonight. Southeast winds across 
the central and eastern islands this evening will strengthen 
through early Saturday, while diminishing southerly winds near 
Kauai trend southeast overnight as a high pressure ridge builds 
north of the islands. Moderate to locally breezy trade winds 
developing this weekend, will then continue through the middle of 
next week. The strengthening trade winds will generate small craft
advisory criteria within typical windy areas around Maui County 
and Big Island tonight through the weekend.

The elevated north swell has been consistently diminishing since 
this morning, and is forecast to gradually lower tonight through 
Saturday. No other significant northwest or north swells are 
likely through the middle of next week. 

Small, long-period south swells will maintain current south shore
surf through Saturday. Strengthening trade winds this weekend 
will create rising, choppy surf along east facing shores into next
week.
&&

.HFO WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Small Craft Advisory from 6 PM this evening to 6 PM HST Sunday 
for Maalaea Bay-Pailolo Channel-Alenuihaha Channel-Big Island 
Leeward Waters-Big Island Southeast Waters.


&&

$$


DISCUSSION...JVC
AVIATION...Vaughan/EV
MARINE...Kino/SWR
