FXUS64 KHGX 212324
AFDHGX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Houston/Galveston TX
624 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...New AVIATION...

.SHORT TERM...
(This evening through Saturday Night)
Issued at 338 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

As surface high pressure continues to scoot out eastward, those 
southwesterly winds will gradually transition to southerly by the 
late afternoon/evening hours. Thus the trend of increasing humidity 
shall commence...but at least high temperatures will hold steady the 
next couple of days with 850mb temperatures hovering at 12-15°C. This 
is even with subtle ridging aloft as revealed in this morning's 12Z 
500mb upper air obs. Although daytime temperatures between today and 
Saturday will be relatively the same (highs in the mid to upper 
80s), there is a slight bit of difference. With southwesterly flow 
throughout most of the day, we'll continue to stay dry. Satellite 
derived total PW values are holding steady around the 10th to 25th 
percentile (0.59" and 0.79" respectively). By Saturday, this 
increases to 0.9"-1.1", which doesn't sound like much...because it 
isn't. But, it'll be enough to make it feel ever so slightly more 
humid along with an increase in scattered cloud cover.

The increased humidity will be more prevalent in the overnight hours 
though as low temperatures go from the low to mid 60s tonight to the 
mid 60s to low 70s on Saturday night. Our high temperatures on 
Tuesday and Wednesday were also in this range....how quickly the 
tables turn. This weekend will not only be featured by a rise in 
temperatures and moisture, but increased winds as well! If you had 
lee cyclogenesis on your AFD bingo card, I got you covered. An area 
of low pressure developing east of the Rockies will tighten the 
pressure gradient leading to a LLJ developing by this evening and 
prevailing into Saturday. Gusts will be higher the further north you 
go, but all areas are likely to see sustained southerly winds around 
15-20 mph with gusts up to 25 mph on Saturday. So, if you have any 
outdoor decorations for spooky season (especially inflatables), they 
may become possessed and try to make a run for it if they're not 
properly secured. 

Saturday also features an upper level trough digging down into the 
northwestern CONUS that looks to continuously deepen going into 
early next week. This sets the stage for what's to come in the long 
term period...Hint: it rhymes with bold bunt. 

Batiste

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Sunday through next Thursday)
Issued at 338 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A deepening upper-level trough will begin to dig into the 
Northern/Central Rockies on Sunday, strengthening the low-level 
southerly flow over the region. Increasing southerly WAA will 
surge more humid conditions with isolated streamer/very light 
showers during the day. Breezy conditions continue as pressure 
gradient sharpens in response to a sfc low over the High Plains. 
Model soundings suggest winds around 20-28 knots at top of the BL;
resulting in sfc gusts up to 25 mph at times. 

Mid-to upper level dynamics change as we head into the upcoming 
week. The aforementioned upper-lvl trough will split into 
different pieces of energy: one impulse of energy will move over 
the Northern Plains/Midwest, a stronger impulse/vort max will dig 
over the Southern Plains and a smaller vort max associated with 
what is now Tropical Cyclone Roslyn over the eastern Pacific will 
move over our region. Pattern aloft combined with an approaching 
cold front will bring the next chance for showers and 
thunderstorms ahead and along the boundary. Global models continue
in agreement with the FROPA, pushing the boundary Monday 
afternoon into early Tuesday time frame. 

Drier and slightly cooler air will filter in behind the front. It
does not appear this front will have a big impact on temperatures
but we should see enough cool air to help keep temperatures 
slightly below normal Tuesday and Wednesday. A gradual warming 
trend along with increasing rain/storm chances return towards the 
end of the week with the passage of another upper-lvl trough and 
its associated frontal boundary. 

05

&&

.AVIATION...
(00Z TAF Issuance)
Issued at 615 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR conditions are expected through the TAF period. S-SW winds of
10-15 KTS with higher gusts will continue this evening and
gradually relax tonight to 5-10 KTS. Winds will strengthen again 
by Sat morning with speeds ranging around 12-16 KTS with gusts of 
23-28 KTS possible at times throughout the day. An increase in
cloudiness expected Sat, as low level moisture increases with the
southerly flow. 

24

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 338 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Surface high pressure centered to our east will continue to bring 
moderate onshore flow tonight and will persist into the weekend. 
Gusts around 20 knots can be expected tonight; therefore, Caution 
flags conditions (SCEC)remain in effect. Pressure gradient becomes 
even tighter on Saturday through Monday as a strong surface low 
pressure develops over the Plains. This will result in winds from 15 
to 25 mph, with gusts in excess of 25 mph at times during this time 
frame. Small Craft Advisories will likely be needed. Seas will 
gradually build through the weekend with wave heights around 6-7 ft 
possible by Monday and Tuesday ahead and behind the passage of a 
cold front. This front should reach the coast Monday night into 
Tuesday, bringing light to moderate offshore flow through the end of 
the week. 

Beach conditions: There is a potential for a high rip current risk 
along all Gulf facing beaches this weekend and could persist through 
mid-week. 05

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
College Station (CLL)	  62  87  66  89 /   0   0   0   0 
Houston (IAH)			  64  86  69  86 /   0   0  10  10 
Galveston (GLS)			  72  82  74  82 /   0   0  10  10 

&&

.HGX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
TX...None.
GM...Small Craft Should Exercise Caution through Saturday morning for 
     GMZ330-335-350-355-370-375.

&&

$$
