FXUS64 KHUN 231829
AFDHUN

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Huntsville AL
129 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New NEAR TERM, SHORT TERM, LONG TERM...

.NEAR TERM...
(Tonight)
Issued at 128 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A beautiful fall day is ongoing across the Tennessee Valley. The
upper level pattern depicts a trough along the eastern Seaboard 
with a longwave ridge across much of the central US and another 
trough dropping in across the Rockies. This trough out west will 
be a feature to watch for impactful weather next week. As for 
tonight, afternoon temperatures in the mid to upper 70s today will
gradually cool down into the upper 40s to lower 50s. Given a dry 
airmass in place combined with light winds overnight, do not 
expect any fog formation.

&&

.SHORT TERM...
(Monday through Wednesday)
Issued at 128 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

At the start of the work week, the ridge over the Central CONUS
amplifies and shifts east. At the same time, a trough digs down
into the Southwest US. As a result, Monday will be another very
pleasant fall day with afternoon highs in the mid to upper 70s
once again under mostly sunny skies. 

The tranquil weather pattern comes to an end on Tuesday as a low
pressure system at the base of the aformentioned trough pushes
northeast across the ARKLATEX region into the Mississippi and
Tennessee River Valleys. A cold front is forecast to be situated
to the south of the low and it is expected to sweep through
Northern Alabama during the second half of Tuesday. Some timing
uncertainties still exist, but models generally show the front
entering northwest Alabama in the afternoon and moving to the 
east quickly. Showers and potentially a few thunderstorms are 
possible along the front as it moves east across the area. 
Gradient winds ahead of the front will be gusting 20-30 knots
therefore, a wind advisory may be needed in a future forecast 
update.

The greatest uncertainty is the severe threat with this line of 
showers and storms. SPC has outlooked our entire forecast area on 
Tuesday in a day 3 marginal risk area with a slight risk area 
further to the west. Given the track of the low, the synoptic lift
is forecast to be quite strong, especially right along the front.
However, the level of moisture return ahead of the front is still
uncertain and as a result, model guidance shows very low amounts 
of CAPE on Tuesday. This would limit thunderstorm development. 
But if a storm does form, it will be in a very favorable shear 
environment with both good speed and directional shear. Overall, 
given the parameters in place on Tuesday, the most likely severe 
risk will be damaging winds, but given the shear profiles a 
tornado or two cannot be ruled out. 

Cooler air behind the front advects in form the northwest.
However, not nearly as cold of an airmass as last week. Afternoon
highs on Wednesday are forecast to be in the 60s with overnight
lows in the 40s. 

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Thursday through Sunday)
Issued at 128 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Dry and seasonable weather returns to the end the work week as a
more zonal upper level pattern takes shape across the Southeast. 
Afternoon highs both Thursday and Friday will be in the 70s with 
overnight lows in the upper 40s to lower 50s. Another trough
begins to drop down across the Rockies late next week. Current
guidance suggests this trough and expected low pressure system to
have a similar track to the system at the start of this week.
However, the dynamics are much weaker and only showers are
expected on Saturday and Sunday. The entire weekend will not be a
washout, but timing differences in the medium range guidance 
makes it difficult at this time to narrow down the best chance to 
see rain. 

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 1154 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions are expected throughout the TAF period. Winds will
be gusty out of the south this afternoon before diminishing 
around sunset. 

&&

.HUN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AL...None.
TN...None.
&&

$$

NEAR TERM...GH
SHORT TERM....GH
LONG TERM....GH
AVIATION...GH
