FXUS64 KHUN 231654
AFDHUN

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Huntsville AL
1154 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New AVIATION...

.NEAR TERM...
(Rest of Today)
Issued at 843 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Water vapor imagery this morning shows a shortwave trough lifting
north and east across Eastern TN/KY. A few high clouds along the
southern edge of this feature are moving to the east across the
forecast area. As this shortwave moves away, ridging begins to
build across the Southeast. This will result in another gorgeous
day here in the Tennessee Valley with afternoon highs in the mid
to upper 70s. Some places in NW AL may even reach 80F. The only
minor change in the forecast this morning was to lower cloud cover
to better align with the latest satellite imagery.

&&

.SHORT TERM...
(Tonight through Tuesday night)
Issued at 414 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The mid-tropospheric ridge noted in the near term section will 
begin to amplify and shift eastward early Monday morning, 
eventually becoming aligned along the Appalachian Mountain range 
from Monday afternoon-early Tuesday morning. Thus, after another 
cool morning with lows in the u40s-l50s, a gradual increase in 
deep-layer southwesterly flow to the west of the ridge axis will 
promote similar afternoon high temperatures in the u70s-l80s on 
Monday. The southwesterly flow regime will strengthen further on 
Monday night, as a well-defined shortwave trough within the base 
of the broader longwave to our west tracks eastward from the 
southern High Plains into the Red River Valley, accompanied by a 
deepening surface low to its east. An increase in cloud cover, 
coupled with strengthening south-southeasterly low-level winds and
the onset of moisture advection will allow for milder lows in the
mid 50s-lower 60s.

Latest NWP guidance is in good agreement this morning, suggesting
that the mid-level shortwave trough will lift northeastward into 
northern portions of the Mid-South region on Tuesday and into the 
OH Valley Tuesday night, assuming an increasing negative tilt with
time. A band of strongly-forced convection is expected to evolve 
along a surface trough extending southward from the deepening low 
as it shifts eastward through the Arklatex region early Tuesday 
morning, with this feature (perhaps in the form of a broken QLCS) 
predicted to advance east-northeastward through the Arklamiss late
Tuesday morning and into our region Tuesday afternoon.

Present indications are that the convective system will encounter
an increasingly dry/stable airmass with eastward extent across 
our region, and prospects for any meaningful destabilization could
be hampered further by widespread clouds and preceding light 
shower activity that could begin as early as sunrise across our 
western zones. This should yield a band of low-topped convective 
showers and perhaps a few embedded thunderstorms that will still 
be capable of producing strong winds given the magnitude of the 
environmental gradient flow. That said, shear profiles will be 
highly favorable for the development of mesocyclones and tornadoes
with any stronger updrafts that manage to develop, warranting a 
Marginal Risk for severe thunderstorms for the entire region. 
Aside from the convective wind threat, a Wind Advisory could be 
needed for most of the region on Tuesday, as sustained winds will 
be in the 20-30 MPH range with gusts of 30-40 MPH. Given the fast-
moving nature of the system, most locations will only receive 
between 0.5-1 inch of rainfall, as the majority of the 
precipitation will be moving eastward and out of the CWFA between 
00-03Z Wednesday. Weak cold advection will drive lows back down 
into the m-u 40s Wednesday morning, with low stratus clouds 
expected to persist through sunrise.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Wednesday through Saturday)
Issued at 414 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Precip will quickly come to an end early Wednesday morning as the
cold front exits the TN Valley. High pressure will build in, 
helping to filter in drier and cooler air. Won't be an arctic 
blast, but enough to drop temps a little below normal on 
Wednesday.

Ridge in place is short lived as our next system digs through the
Four Corners on Thursday and develops a sfc low as it heads into 
TX. SW flow aloft will start to send moisture and warmth our way, 
increasing cloud cover and help daytime highs reach the lower 70s 
Thursday and Friday. The question is how much of that moisture 
also makes it into the low to mid levels due to the track of the 
sfc low. The ECMWF takes the sfc low farther N than the GFS' 
coastal track this weekend which would return some sfc SE flow, 
but forecast soundings still struggle with moisture return. In the
upper levels, the GFS is much faster and farther south than the 
ECMWF with the trough, resulting in the sfc low track differences.

Had to stay with guidance Friday through the weekend due to the 
extent of disagreement within the models regarding the track and 
pace of the upper level low and the track of the sfc low. This 
provides a low confidence forecast Friday and Saturday, however it
currently has rain returning Friday afternoon and isolated to 
scattered showers lingering through Saturday.

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 1154 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions are expected throughout the TAF period. Winds will
be gusty out of the south this afternoon before diminishing 
around sunset. 

&&

.HUN WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AL...None.
TN...None.
&&

$$

NEAR TERM...GH
SHORT TERM....70/DD
LONG TERM....JMS
AVIATION...GH
