FXUS63 KUNR 212309
AFDUNR

Area Forecast Discussion For Western SD and Northeastern WY
National Weather Service Rapid City SD
509 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.DISCUSSION...(This Evening Through Friday)
Issued at 202 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Potent upper trough beginning to dig into the western CONUS as 
semi-active easterly flow continues over the Northern Plains. Sfc 
front has pushed back north with breezy southerly winds and mild 
weather continuing over the FA. Weak sfc low will traverse this 
near-stalled boundary, undulating the boundary in place. As the 
western CONUS upper trough shifts east, another sfc low will 
develop along the boundary and deepen Sat. This will support 
breezy SW winds south of the warm front into NE WY and southern 
SD, along with mild and dry weather Sat. Strong signal in hires 
models for standing mountain wave winds over the BH Sat, with 
potential gusts over 50 along the spine of the BH, and potentially
in the eastern foothills where downsloping may develop in the 
later afternoon. Long wave upper trough will slide east Sat night 
with the sfc cold front entering the western FA. This system will 
bring rain, snow, and windy conditions to the region by Sunday. 
Forecast models have started trending more toward a split wave as 
the southern end of the trough digs and the northern portion 
advances NE into southern Canada. This will still allow a period 
of decent lift across the area Sunday into Sunday night. However, 
this would place the best chances for precip across the NW FA and 
the northern BH (per upslope lift there). Quicker exit of the best
lift will also support lower precip amounts, esp SE of the BH 
where some areas may not see any precip given downsloping and dry 
slotting. This remains a concern and afraid QPF amounts are too
high in these areas. A rain to snow transition will occur over 
the western third with the best chances for snow accums over the 
NE WY plains, northern BH, and maybe far NW SD Sunday night. Still
looks like possible adv level snow in the northern BH. Will keep 
monitoring. The other impact from this system will be gusty NW 
winds as the low deepens off to the east Sunday night, with adv 
levels likely on the SD plains (maybe high wind warning levels 
east of the BH by Monday). Much cooler conds then expected for the
remainder of next week with numbers just below seasonal norms. 
Chances for rain/snow then return toward the end of the week with 
semi-active flow

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS Through 00Z Saturday Evening)
Issued At 509 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR conditions will continue through the TAF period.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued At 202 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Warm and dry conditions continue across much of the area into 
Saturday, with critical to elevated fire weather conditions 
persisting. Red flag warnings remain effect for much of the 
northeast WY plains and far southwest SD today with breezy 
conditions and humidity values into the lower to mid teens. 

Saturday will be a warm and dry day across southern portions of 
the forecast area, as a warm front sets up across portions of 
northeast WY and southern SD. Southwesterly winds will be very 
gusty to the south of the boundary. Red flag or near red flag 
conditions will likely develop across at least southern portions 
of the northeast WY plains into south central SD. Although RH's 
may struggle to reach criteria on portions of the NE WY plains, 
winds gusting to over 45 mph with dry fuels and near critical RH 
supports extension of the Red Flag warning there through Sat. Have
issued a fire weather watch for the remainder of southern SD, 
pushing it north into the ESE portions of the Black Hills and 
surrounding plains given concerns on dry downslope flow.

&&

.UNR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SD...Fire Weather Watch from Saturday morning through Saturday 
     evening for SDZ320-321-324-325-332>335.
     Red Flag Warning until 7 PM MDT Saturday for SDZ322-326.
WY...Red Flag Warning until 7 PM MDT Saturday for WYZ315-317.
     Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for WYZ314-316.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...JC
AVIATION...7
FIRE WEATHER...JC
