FXUS61 KCAR 220153
AFDCAR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Caribou ME
953 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure will build southeast of the region through 
tomorrow. Low pressure will lift north toward the region later 
Sunday into Monday then exit to the east Tuesday. Another low
could lift north toward the region Wednesday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY/...
950 PM Update: Based on trends from latest avbl sfc obs, we
again lowered fcst lows ovr far NW vlys, with Esct Stn already
down to 29 deg F at 9 pm. However, some high cldnss is beginning
to cross ovr into NW ME from Ern QB, so the trend of temps into
the late ngt is uncertain attm, with models showing a sig patch
of high cldnss getting into NE ptns of the FA late tngt before
dissipating ovr NB prov by erly Sat morn. Posted lows again at 7
am, but actual tms of low temps will vary sig lctn to lctn being
a function on when and how long cldnss is present and not. 

Prev Disc: High pressure will slowly settle southeast over the 
outer Gulf of Maine overnight with ridging over the CWA. Winds 
will become light and variable late tonight. Light winds, clear 
skies will allow for temperatures to fall back into the lower to  
mid 30s across the Moosehead Region, Millinocket to Danforth and
points north and locally sub 30 degrees ovr far NW valleys. 
Across the Bangor region to the coast expect lower to mid 40s 
for lows. Patchy fog may develop in the river valleys especially
where rivers remain very swollen and at record daily flow. High
pressure will remain in control during the day tomorrow with 
dry air and 925mb temperatures increasing to between +10 and 
+12C. This will result in highs slightly warmer in the low to 
mid 60s nearly areawide except across the higher terrain. 
Tomorrow will be breezy once again with south- southwest winds 
10-15mph occasionally gusting to 20mph.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SATURDAY NIGHT THROUGH MONDAY/...
High pressure begins to exit across the Maritimes Saturday 
night/Sunday, with a trof extending north from low pressure along 
the southeast/Mid-Atlantic coast. Expect mostly clear skies Saturday 
night. Clouds then increase, from south to north, Sunday. Could also 
have a slight chance of rain late toward the Downeast coast. The low 
weakens along the coast Sunday night/Monday with the trof extending 
toward the Gulf of Maine. Rain expands north Sunday night, across 
mostly Downeast and central portions of the forecast area with 
lesser rain chances across northern areas. Rain persists 
Monday, though the coverage and northern extent remain 
uncertain. Rainfall totals Sunday night through Monday also 
remain uncertain. Temperatures will be at above normal levels 
Sunday/Monday.

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Remnants of the trof could persist Monday night keeping a chance of 
showers across the region. High pressure re-establishes itself 
Tuesday, though could still have a slight chance of showers. 
Another low should lift north along the coast Wednesday into 
Friday, though uncertainty regarding the timing increases 
through late week. A faster scenario could bring rain to the 
region Wednesday into Thursday, with improving conditions 
Friday. A slower scenario could keep dry conditions through 
Wednesday, with rain Thursday into Friday. Rain chances and 
amounts Wednesday through Friday will be dependent on the 
eventual timing and track of the low. Temperatures will remain 
at above normal levels Tuesday through Friday. However, 
temperatures will be dependent on cloud cover and rain chances.

&&

.AVIATION /22Z FRIDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
NEAR TERM: VFR conditions through tomorrow evening. Winds
becoming Light & Variable less than 10kts tonight. S-SW winds
tomorrow 10-15kts w/ gusts to 20kts possible. 

SHORT TERM: 

Saturday night through Sunday...Generally VFR. A slight chance 
of rain late Sunday Downeast. Variable winds 5 to 10 knots.

Sunday night...VFR early, lowering to MVFR/IFR with a chance of 
rain. Variable winds 5 to 10 knots.

Monday...MVFR/IFR with rain likely. Variable winds 5 to 10 knots.

Monday night...MVFR/IFR with a chance of rain. Variable winds 5 to 
10 knots. 

Tuesday...VFR/MVFR with a slight chance of showers. Variable 
winds around 10 knots.

Tuesday night...VFR/MVFR with a slight chance of showers. South
winds 5 to 10 knots.

Wednesday...Uncertainty, though VFR/MVFR with a chance of showers 
possible. Variable winds 5 to 10 knots.

&&

.MARINE...
NEAR TERM: Waves continue to subside over the waters this
evening. Waves become 2-3ft every 5-7sec overnight and last 
into tomorrow evening. SW winds remain below SCA but gusts
tomorrow afternoon may approach 20-22kts over the outer waters.

SHORT TERM: Winds/seas below small craft advisory levels Saturday
night through Monday. Rain and patchy fog Sunday night into 
Monday.

&&

.CAR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
ME...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$

Near Term...VJN
Short Term...Norcross
Long Term...Norcross
Aviation...VJN/Norcross
Marine...VJN/Norcross
