FXUS01 KWBC 232002
PMDSPD

Short Range Forecast Discussion
NWS Weather Prediction Center College Park MD
400 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Valid 00Z Mon Oct 24 2022 - 00Z Wed Oct 26 2022

...A robust low pressure system is bringing the first widespread
wintry weather event across the northern and central Rockies into
the northern High Plains...

...Severe weather is possible tonight over the eastern portion of
the northern to central Plains...

...Another low pressure system will bring a quick round of heavy
rain, strong to severe thunderstorms across the central U.S.
Monday and Tuesday...

A low pressure system exiting the northern and central Rockies is
forecast to intensify further and continue to bring the first
wintry weather event into the northern High Plains through
tonight.  A cold air mass from western Canada will be ushered into
the region behind the intense low pressure system, resulting in
rain changing to a period of accumulating snow across the northern
High Plains.  Northwesterly winds are expected to strengthen to
gale force with stronger gusts.  The storm is forecast to be near
peak intensity Monday morning as it tracks northeastward into
southern Canada, bringing improving conditions with the snow and
winds gradually tapering off later on Monday.  Behind the storm,
much below normal temperatures will be surged all the way through
the western U.S. and into much of the northern and central Plains,
replacing near record high temperatures upward to 90 degrees over
the central Plains this afternoon, to below freezing by Tuesday
morning.

Meanwhile, Hurricane Roslyn has made landfall and weaken rapidly
over the mountainous terrain of central Mexico.  Higher level
moisture associated with the remnants of Roslyn is forecast to
interact with the trailing cold front associated with the deep
cyclone over the northern Plains.  This interaction is forecast to
trigger the formation of a new low pressure system over the
southern Plains on Monday.  Rain and thunderstorms are expected to
quickly develop and expand across the southern Plains toward the
Mississippi Valley on Monday as this low pressure system deepens
along the front.  Excessive rainfall and severe thunderstorms are
possible on Monday into early on Tuesday ahead of this system.


Kong


Graphics are available at
https://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/basicwx/basicwx_ndfd.php
$$


