FXUS01 KWBC 232029
PMDSPD

Short Range Forecast Discussion
NWS Weather Prediction Center College Park MD
428 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Valid 00Z Mon Oct 24 2022 - 00Z Wed Oct 26 2022

...A robust low pressure system is bringing the first widespread
wintry weather event across the northern and central Rockies into
the northern High Plains...

...Severe weather is possible tonight over the eastern portion of
the northern to central Plains...

...Another low pressure system will bring a quick round of heavy
rain, strong to severe thunderstorms across the central U.S.
Monday and Tuesday...

A low pressure system exiting the northern and central Rockies is
forecast to intensify further and continue to bring the first
wintry weather event into the northern High Plains through
tonight.  A cold air mass from western Canada will be ushered into
the region behind the intense low pressure system, resulting in
rain changing to a period of accumulating snow across the northern
High Plains.  Northwesterly winds behind the storm center are
expected to strengthen to gale force with stronger gusts along
with falling temperatures.  The storm is forecast to be near peak
intensity Monday morning as it tracks northeastward into southern
Canada.  Improving conditions are expected to set in as the storm
moves farther away, with the snow and winds gradually taper off
later on Monday.  Behind the storm, much below normal temperatures
will be surged all the way through the western U.S. and into much
of the northern and central Plains, replacing near record high
temperatures upward to 90 degrees this afternoon, to below
freezing by Tuesday morning.

Meanwhile, Hurricane Roslyn has made landfall and is weakening
rapidly over the mountainous terrain of central Mexico.  Higher
level moisture associated with the remnants of Roslyn is forecast
to interact with the trailing cold front associated with the deep
cyclone over the northern Plains.  This interaction is forecast to
spawn a new low pressure system over the southern Plains on
Monday.  Rain and thunderstorms are expected to quickly develop
and expand across the southern Plains toward the Mississippi
Valley on Monday as this low pressure system deepens along the
front.  Excessive rainfall and severe thunderstorms are possible
on Monday into early on Tuesday ahead of this system.  During the
day on Tuesday, areas of locally heavy rain together with strong
to severe thunderstorms are forecast to move farther northeast
across the Mississippi Valley into the Midwest.

Near the East Coast, a slow-moving front will keep damp and rainy
conditions through much of Monday mainly from the Mid-Atlantic
coast northeastward into coastal New England.  Southern New
England could see a round of heavier rain during the day on Monday
from this system.  By Tuesday, the rain should be slowly tapering
off as the front is forecast to gradually dissipate but the clouds
will likely linger.

Moisture associated with the next Pacific system will rapidly
reach the Pacific Northwest late tonight, bringing with it the
next round of rain to the lower elevation of the Pacific Northwest
and high-elevation snow from the Cascades on Monday, reaching into
the northern Rockies by Tuesday.  Another plume of moisture from
the Pacific is forecast to reach the Pacific Northwest coast later
on Tuesday.


Kong


Graphics are available at
https://www.wpc.ncep.noaa.gov/basicwx/basicwx_ndfd.php
$$


