FXUS61 KLWX 231933
AFDLWX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Baltimore MD/Washington DC
333 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A coastal low will continue to drift northward along the
East Coast through tomorrow. A ridge of high pressure will
reside over the area during the early to middle portions of the
week. A cold front will move through the area by Wednesday
night.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
Low pressure continues to circulate off the NC Coast this
afternoon. Moisture is streaming north and west ahead of the 
system, with cloud cover now covering the vast majority of the 
forecast area. Current radar imagery shows showers over the Bay 
and Eastern Shore slowly spreading westward. These showers will 
continue to spread westward through the remainder of the 
afternoon into the evening. The showers should stop their 
westward progress to the east of the Blue Ridge, with locations 
along the I-95 corridor most likely to experience rainy 
conditions through the evening. The steadiest rain should lift 
off to our northeast during the second half of the overnight, 
with overcast skies remaining in place. Some drizzle may also be
possible to the east of the Blue Ridge overnight. Low 
temperatures tonight should be in the 40s and 50s.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY THROUGH TUESDAY NIGHT/...
The coastal low currently located offshore will slowly weaken
heading into Monday. However, the upper level disturbance
associated with it will linger aloft as it gradually shears out.
At the surface, a narrow ridge of high pressure will remain in
place to the east of the Appalachians. The airmass will become
rather stagnant and moisture laden within this ridge axis. Low
clouds may linger through a good portion of tomorrow to the 
east of the Blue Ridge. As a result, high temperatures for 
tomorrow have been lowered by a few degrees. Thick low cloud 
cover is expected to form again tomorrow night, with drizzle 
also possible. Low temperatures tomorrow night will be in the 
50s for most. Low cloud cover may linger through a good portion
of the day again on Tuesday. Highs both tomorrow and Tuesday 
should be in the 60s to near 70 for most.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
A shortwave trough moving northeast from the Ohio River Valley will 
be absorbed by a large scale trough on Wednesday. As the trough 
moves across the area, precipitation chances will increase. With PW 
values less than 1 inch, widespread precipitation will be limited. 
Precipitation chances will be greatest in the morning before drying 
out leading into Thursday and Friday. Temperatures will be above 
normal on Wednesday before returning to more seasonal temperatures 
behind a passing cold front.  

High pressure will influence our area Thursday and Friday leading to 
dry conditions and seasonal temperatures. Upper level ridging will 
develop over the eastern CONUS ahead of another upper level 
shortwave trough approaching the area from the West. Uncertainty 
still remains regarding the timing and magnitude of the
upper level shortwave trough and associated frontal passage on 
Saturday. While rain chances return on Saturday, the uncertainty 
surrounding the synoptic pattern will determine specific rain 
amounts and rain chances. 

High temperatures will be in the upper 60s-70s on Wednesday before 
mostly staying in the 60s for the remainder of the long term period. 
Overnight lows will be in the 40s-mid 50s for the remainder of the 
long term period depending on elevation. 

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Conditions are VFR this afternoon, but ceilings will lower
tonight as low clouds move in from the east. IFR conditions
appear likely at BWI and MTN, with IFR conditions possible at
DCA and IAD. Showers are also expected later this evening at
DCA, BWI, and MTN, and could make it as far west as IAD. Sub-
VFR conditions may linger into tomorrow morning at the I-95 
corridor terminals, before some improvement during the 
afternoon. Sub-VFR ceilings appear likely again on both Monday 
and Tuesday night, with the potential for those ceilings to 
linger a bit into the daytime hours.

A frontal passage on Wednesday could bring sub-VFR conditions during 
isolated showers. Outside of showers, VFR conditions are expected 
through Friday. Winds will be southerly on Wednesday before shifting 
to more north/northwest on Thursday and Friday.

&&

.MARINE...
SCA level winds will continue in northerly flow through this
evening, before gradually dropping off overnight. SCA conditions
could occur into early tomorrow morning across the wider waters
of the bay. Lighter winds are expected on both Monday and
Tuesday. 

Southerly winds on Wednesday should stay below SCA criteria before 
switching to north/northwest winds on Thursday. Winds will increase 
behind a cold front on Thursday and Friday leading to possible SCA 
criteria conditions. 

&&

.LWX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
DC...None.
MD...None.
VA...None.
WV...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 6 PM EDT this evening for 
     ANZ531>533-536-538>542.
     Small Craft Advisory until 6 AM EDT Monday for ANZ534-537-543.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...KJP
NEAR TERM...KJP
SHORT TERM...KJP
LONG TERM...AVS
AVIATION...AVS/KJP
MARINE...AVS/KJP
