FXUS63 KGLD 212255
AFDGLD

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Goodland KS
455 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Sunday Night) 
Issued at 256 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

For the short term period, dry and warm conditions will continue to 
prevail with above average temperatures in the upper 70's and 80's. 
There are fire weather concerns for this weekend with Sunday seeing 
critical to extreme fire weather conditions.

For the remainder of today, a few clouds continue to drift over the 
area which have kept some areas from reaching the 80's as 
forecasted. But they should exit the area by the evening hours and 
allow for clear skies during the night time. Winds will continue to 
lighten as a broad pressure gradient sets up over the area after 
lower surface pressure moved into the area. With clear skies and 
relatively light winds, temperatures tonight should cool down to 
near 40.

Tomorrow, mostly sunny skies and temperatures in the low 80's are 
expected again. However, winds will be a bit stronger with winds 
from the south around 15 mph with a few gusts approaching 25 mph 
during the afternoon hours as the flow strengthens aloft over the 
area. The 25 mph gusts and dry conditions will allow for briefly 
critical conditions for counties along the Colorado border and south 
of I-70, but didn't have confidence it would last for 3 hours per 
Red Flag Warning criteria. Will have to reassess tonight. Tomorrow 
night should be warmer with stronger winds allowing lows to stay 
closer to 50.

Sunday remains the main focus of the forecast with a potential for 
high impact winds, blowing dust and fire weather conditions. As the 
upper level trough over the northwest moves closer to the area, the 
flow will strengthen ahead (east of) the trough. This will cause 
winds to increase to around 40-55 kts in the 850-500mb layer. These 
winds will then mix down to the surface with daytime heating and 
allow for gusts up to 55 mph along with sustained wind of 25-35 mph 
as the surface pressure gradient tightens ahead of the main low 
pressure system. With the strong winds, blowing dust will be 
possible as winds and lapse rates match suggested values for local 
dust storm research and the region has been dry for the past few 
weeks. Current forecast suggests that blowing dust will be 
widespread and more nuisance level with visibilities around 1-6 
miles. However, there could be a few areas of near brown out 
conditions as guidance has been hinting at area of stronger winds 
just off the surface in a narrow strip. While the location has been 
varying, the likely area will be south of I-70 and/or Eastern 
Colorado. With the high winds, blowing dust, dry/dead fuels and 
relative humidity around 15-20%, critical to extreme fire conditions 
are likely. A Fire Weather Watch has been issued across the entire 
area though winds may not be as strong in Yuma and adjacent 
counties, closer to the low pressure center. In any case, fires will 
be easier to start and can travel rapidly in the strong winds. Fires 
will also add smoke to the air which will further degrade the air 
quality along with blowing dust. Also, any combination of dust and 
smoke may hinder vision of any active fires. Plans should be made to 
deal with these hazardous accordingly. Finally, the passage of the 
front in the late afternoon/evening will cause a sudden wind shift 
and could restrengthen the winds as surface pressures could rise 
around 8-10mb per 3 hours. If the front delays a little later till 
around 3Z (9pm MDT), this could lead to a false sense of security as 
winds would decrease with sunset before restrengthening and shifting 
direction in the middle of the night. Otherwise, the remainder of 
the night may see some light rain in the wake of the front as 
moisture is forecasted to advect into the area. If the cold air 
advection is strong enough, some snow may mix into Eastern Colorado 
though no accumulation would occur.

.LONG TERM...(Monday through Friday)
Issued at 236 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

For this long-term forecast period, an active weather pattern looks to 
continue. However, unfortunately for the High Plains, even though the 
general weather pattern will be active, this will not result in 
substantial precipitation across the region. 

Beginning with Monday, the large and dynamic upper level system, the 
one that will cause Sunday's issues, will be ejecting across the Great 
Plains. By Monday evening, this system should be centered over Oklahoma 
and/or Texas, heading east. As this system moves away from the region, 
a cold front will be pulled south with it. This front, which should 
pass through our area Sunday evening, will result in continued breezy 
conditions throughout the day, as well as much cooler temperatures with 
daytime maximums only reaching the 50s. On the backside of the low 
pressure, the subsident regime should move in, which will lead to a 
lack of precipitation across the Tri-State Area despite persistent 
cloudy conditions anticipated. Behind the cold front, some drier air 
should move across the area. However, due to the colder temperatures, 
am not anticipating fire weather concerns as minimum relative humidity 
is currently projected to fall into the 20 to 30 percent range, well 
above local criteria and during a time winds aren't nearly as strong 
compared to Sunday.

On Tuesday, strong zonal flow across the Rockies should result in a lee 
trough forming in the Colorado Front Range. Under clear skies, winds 
may become breezy due to this trough and daytime mixing. Persistent dry 
air and slightly warmer temperatures, combined with the winds, could 
lead to a fire weather day for the High Plains. Currently, it seems the 
best chance for winds and humidity to be collocated would be west of 
Highway 83 and north of Highway 40, but due to some uncertainty in this 
scenario and among model guidance, will hold off on discussing this 
potential marginal event, especially given our focus on high-impact 
weather on Sunday.

Going into the middle of next week, it appears there could be yet 
another intense upper level low pressure system moving across the 
Plains. Based on the timing, it appears as though Wednesday would fall 
in the return flow ahead of the low, and Thursday would bring post-
frontal and low passage type weather. There is some run to run 
variability among the model guidance, as well as differences among each 
model member. With that said, this portion of the forecast is fairly 
uncertain although most model members are picking up on this system, 
just differ with the movement and positioning at each time step. As 
this system moves out over the Plains, a cold front will move through 
our area, bringing some colder air...but how cold is the main question. 
Currently, most guidance don't show a wealth of cold air, which would 
mean that the main precipitation type would remain rain. Winds also 
don't currently project to be too bad, but it's still early and there 
is a lot to resolve with this system. A low pressure system like this 
would get our attention in the cold season, but currently, it seems 
that we don't have to worry too much about it just yet due to a lack of 
cold air and the low staying further south, which may limit the amount 
of precipitation we realize across the High Plains. Based on the 
current forecast and indications, plan for a cooler day Thursday and 
Friday with breezy north winds and perhaps a few showers across the 
area.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Sunday evening)
Issued at 455 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Both terminals to see VFR conditions during the forecast period. 
Winds for KGLD, light/variable through 05z Saturday, then west- 
southwest 10-20kts. Strongest gusts from 18z onward. Winds for 
KMCK, light/variable through 18z Saturday, then south around 
10kts.

&&

.GLD WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
KS...Fire Weather Watch from Sunday morning through Sunday evening 
     for KSZ001>004-013>016-027>029-041-042.

CO...Fire Weather Watch from Sunday morning through Sunday evening 
     for COZ252>254.

NE...Fire Weather Watch from Sunday morning through Sunday evening 
     for NEZ079>081.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...KAK
LONG TERM...RRH
AVIATION...JN
