FXUS63 KTOP 212254
AFDTOP

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Topeka KS
554 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...AVIATION UPDATE...

.DISCUSSION...
Issued at 252 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Key Points:

- Elevated fire danger through Sunday

- Severe storm potential Sunday night and/or Monday

- More fall-like conditions return next work week

Early this afternoon, the forecast area finds itself in zonal upper 
flow with a southern stream trough noted off the CA coast with broad 
cyclonic flow to the north over Canada. Surface trough extending 
from the Upper Midwest through the Central Plains has been slow to 
move through the day. An increasing pressure gradient as well as 
good mixing has allowed for gusty winds generally along and 
southeast of the Turnpike, and this southerly flow with WAA has 
allowed for well above normal temps in the 80s. Spotty Red Flag 
conditions may still be possible this afternoon, but should remain 
brief at any one location. Regardless, very high fire danger is 
expected to be the norm area-wide.

Heading into Saturday, upper troughing begins to develop over the 
western CONUS, helping sfc low pressure to strengthen a bit in the 
lee of the Rockies. This will allow southerly winds to become a 
little gustier today than yesterday, but the good news is that 
moisture advection is expected to increase as well, which should 
offset the fire danger enough to preclude Red Flag conditions. We 
will still see elevated fire weather concerns across most of the 
area, however, so burning is still discouraged.

The aforementioned trough in the western US deepens further into 
Sunday, and there are still some differences among guidance on how 
deep it gets, but there seems to be better agreement in a slower 
progression of the initial shortwave ejecting out of the trough. 
This keeps most or all of the area within the warm sector as the sfc 
low continues to deepen into the afternoon. While this is good for 
most of the area to see continuing moisture return, north central KS 
remains more of a question mark as the dryline could still set up 
near our western counties where the fire danger risk is greatest. 
Regardless, the low-level wind field is progged to increase with 
850mb winds being strong enough to mix advisory-level winds to the 
surface.

The slower progression of the system keeps lower confidence in 
storms developing with warm low-level temps precluding storms in the 
warm sector. There's a low chance storms could develop in the early 
evening in our western areas near the dryline, but chances are 
better heading into Monday as the upper dynamics provide more 
support with the advancing trough and sfc cold front. Guidance 
diverges further by Monday night and especially Tuesday, as the GFS 
continues to develop a cut-off low over the Southern Plains while 
the ECMWF keeps an open wave. GFS appears to be trying to speed up 
the low compared to previous runs, but remains one of the slower 
solutions.

Cooler and more fall-like temperatures are expected behind the cold 
front on Monday, which should last through Thursday.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Sunday) 
Issued at 554 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Dry air over the region should keep VFR conditions in place 
through the day Saturday. A strengthening low level jet at the 
top of a steep nocturnal inversion is expected to create some LLWS
tonight. Rapid cooling of the boundary means the LLWS could set up
as early as 02Z for TOP and FOE. 

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 252 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Expect at least very high fire danger to continue in the afternoon 
hours through the weekend. While some locations may be close to Red 
Flag criteria, the limiting factor is that the strongest winds and 
lowest RH are displaced from each other on Saturday. South winds 
gusting 20-30mph in east central are offset by minimum RH in the 30-
40% range, whereas north central KS could get down to 20% but winds 
are limited to 20mph.

On Sunday, gusty winds possibly as high as 40-50 mph will make any 
fires difficult to control regardless of whether Red Flag criteria 
are actually met. North central KS has the greatest risk where RH is 
currently forecast around 30%, but could fall lower if the dryline 
sets up far enough east.

&&

.TOP WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NONE.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Picha
AVIATION...Wolters
FIRE WEATHER...Picha
