FXUS64 KLUB 212329
AFDLUB

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Lubbock TX
629 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...New AVIATION...

.SHORT TERM...
(This evening through Saturday)
Issued at 242 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Winds are continuing to slowly increase across the region as the 
surface pressure gradient tightens. Sustained winds should peak 
later this afternoon in the 15-25 mph range before decreasing 
slightly after sunset. Winds should remain near or slightly above 10 
mph area wide during the overnight hours as surface troughing 
remains across the region. The axis of the surface trough should 
slowly move east during the overnight hours with the axis becoming 
positioned over the Rolling Plains by sunrise. This will shift winds 
to a more westerly direction behind the trough allowing drier air to 
filter into the FA. The westerly winds will also keep overnight lows 
on the warm side compared to recent nights, mid 50s to low 60s. A 
second surface lee trough is progged to develop by tomorrow 
afternoon and will help shift winds back to the southwest. Highs 
tomorrow afternoon should not be too different from today's highs. 
Winds will be slightly stronger tomorrow afternoon (15-25 mph) as 
the surface gradient tightens once again as well as a tighter mid 
level heights. While this would normally allow for stronger winds to 
transport to the surface, cloud cover should help keep winds in 
check with wind speeds staying below advisory criteria.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Saturday night through next Thursday)
Issued at 242 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

An amplifying mid/upper-level trough is forecast to dig into the 
Great Basin region with a southern-stream shortwave trough pivoting 
towards Baja California on Sunday morning. The high-level/250 mb jet 
streaks associated with these troughs are expected to phase during 
the day Sunday, resulting in a 130-140 kt 250 mb jet streak evolving 
over the State of New Mexico and nosing into the west-central Great 
Plains region. Steep, geopotential height falls are expected as this 
synoptic-scale trough deepens and will feature several smaller-scale 
shortwave perturbations rotating through the mean flow, resulting in 
lee cyclogenesis of a sub-990 mb low over the north-central Great 
Plains on Sunday. Conditions will already be breezy prior to sunrise 
on Sunday with southwesterly winds at around 15 mph which will keep 
lows hovering around 60 deg F area-wide, and as the boundary-layer 
begins to mix and tap into the 30-40 kt 850 mb jet stream, the 
faster flow in the low-levels is expected to translate to the 
surface. However, forecast vertical thermodynamic profiles indicate 
the potential for multiple portions throughout the steering flow 
layer (700-300 mb) to become nearly saturated or saturated as the 
strong, southwesterly fetch advects sub-tropical moisture in from 
the northeastern Pacific Basin. 

Confidence in cloud cover advecting over the CWA on Sunday is high 
based off of favorable forward-trajectory forecasts of isentropes 
with saturation mixing ratios near 8 g/kg possible within the 310 K 
theta surface beneath an opaque cirrus shield owing to the strong, 
large-scale geostrophic deformation and forcing for ascent. This 
will therefore affect the magnitude of downward momentum transport 
across the CWA as boundary-layer heights are shunted with theta-e 
profiles constant through ~750 mb. Low-end windy conditions are 
expected across most of the CWA with wind speeds generally between 
20-30 mph, and the best potential for wind gusts up to 35 mph will 
be nearest the base of the trough across the extreme southwestern 
Texas Panhandle. The aforementioned geopotential height falls will 
also contribute to the advection of a weak, elevated mixed layer 
over the CWA with surface and most-unstable parcels yielding around 
500 J/kg of CAPE. If any high-based rain showers materialize within 
the intense kinematic environment, then a localized dry-microburst 
event or two will be possible. PoPs have been kept below mentionable 
thresholds for the afternoon hours on Sunday due to low confidence 
in rain showers forming as the skinny updrafts will struggle against 
the effects of strong cloud-layer shear.

There exists higher than usual uncertainty among global NWP guidance 
with respect to how the mid/upper-level trough evolves by Monday as 
a compact vorticity lobe splits off from the southern-stream 
shortwave trough and rotates into the northern Great Plains. The big 
question is whether or not a mid-level closed cyclone develops over 
the southern Rocky Mountains or if it remains an open trough as a 
split-flow regime develops over the central CONUS. Blended PoPs were 
therefore maintained throughout all of Monday into Tuesday with 
fairly high confidence in an initial wave of rainfall occurring 
across most of the CWA early Monday morning as the base of the 
trough and/or core of the mid-level cyclone remains over the Four 
Corners region. Uncertainty increases thereafter regarding potential 
precipitation placement as the aforementioned features (e.g. closed 
cyclone or open trough) will dictate the orientation of dry-slotting 
in wake of the cold front and if deformation banding can sustain 
itself on the backside of the departing trough/low. In addition to 
the rain chances late Sunday through Tuesday, blustery conditions 
will persist Monday into Tuesday afternoon with northwesterly winds 
quickly diminishing towards dusk on Tuesday as the geopotential 
height and pressure gradients slacken. 

Temperatures will also be much cooler at the start of next week as 
well, with the coolest day on Tuesday due to the northwesterly winds 
post-FROPA with highs peaking in the lower-middle 60s area-wide 
before slightly rebounding as shortwave ridging builds in by mid-
week. Potentially more active weather is in store towards the end of 
the forecast period, though predictability remains limited at this 
time.

Sincavage

&&

.AVIATION...
(00Z TAFS)
Issued at 624 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Continuing VFR expected at all TAF sites. Southwest winds
overnight will veer westerly and increase notably by mid-morning 
on Saturday. Sustained west winds near 20 kt with gusts to and 
potentially exceeding 30 kt are expected at all sites on Saturday
afternoon under increasing high-level cloud cover.

&&

.LUB WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...51
LONG TERM....09
AVIATION...30
