FXUS66 KSEW 231645
AFDSEW

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Seattle WA
945 AM PDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...High pressure will bring dry weather today. A frontal 
system will bring rain and locally windy weather tonight and 
Monday. A second weather system will move through the area Tuesday
and Tuesday night. After a brief break in the middle of the week,
yet another frontal system will stall over the area late in the 
week. This system looks to be the wettest in the next 7 days.

&&

.SHORT TERM /TODAY THROUGH TUESDAY/...Satellite imagery shows
clear skies along the coast and over the Central and Southern
Cascade foothills with low clouds and patchy fog over most of the
interior. Still 32 degrees at 9 am in Shelton, with 30s common
over the Northwest and Southwest Interior. Temperatures elsewhere
at 9 am/16z were in the lower to mid 40s. 

Upper level ridge over the area today will weaken this afternoon.
Light flow in the lower levels combining with the weaken ridge to
make it tough to get rid of the low level moisture over the
interior. High clouds out ahead of an approaching front moving
over the area this afternoon. End result is a mostly cloudy day
for the interior. Along the coast mostly sunny this morning
becoming mostly cloudy this afternoon. Highs will be cool, in the
lower to mid 50s. 

A frontal system will spread rain into the area tonight, reaching
the coast and Olympic Peninsula in the evening and then spreading
over the rest of the area after midnight. It will also become 
locally windy coast and interior north of Everett. Wind speeds
look to be sub-advisory but with leaves on the trees there could
be some downed small branches and so forth. 

The front will shift inland Monday morning with rain changing to 
showers. Showers will become more confined to the mountains by the
evening with a possible Puget Sound Convergence Zone. The higher 
elevations should pick up several inches of new snow. Snow levels 
will generally be 4500-5000 feet. The winter weather advisory for
the North Cascades will continue. 

There won't be much of a break with the next frontal system moving
into the area on Tuesday for another period of rain, mountain
snow, and locally breezy conditions. The front will shift inland
Tuesday night with rain changing to showers. 

No update this morning. 16/Felton

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH SATURDAY/...Previous discussion
follows. There will be a relative lull in the active pattern on 
Wednesday in between weather systems. 

For Thursday and beyond there is a good deal of uncertainty. At
some point, another fairly wet system will move into the area for
more rain and locally windy weather. Ensembles are leaning towards
a wetter period later Thursday into Friday then a brief lull and
another uptick in precipitation later Saturday. 16

&&

.AVIATION...Lowered ceilings have developed and has spread across 
the Puget Sound and adjacent locations. Patchy fog is also 
accompanying the lowered stratus promoting IFR categories. Any 
lingering fog should burn off by 18z. Thereafter, ceilings will 
lift, but high clouds will quickly spread into the area from the NW. 
making for a BKN-OVC ceiling. Rain will return to the area tonight 
and early Monday. Winds light and variable this morning, becoming S 
this afternoon 4-6 kt.

KSEA...MVFR to IFR ceilings observed this morning, with patchy fog 
not too far from the airfield. Can't rule out a short period of low 
vsbys will be possible between now and 17-18z this morning but the 
main concern should be ceilings. Clouds will lift back towards VFR 
this afternoon, with high clouds quickly spreading in. Winds light 
out of the S around 5kts.

Kovacik/McMillian

&&

.MARINE...A series of frontal systems will impact area waters 
over the next week, bringing periods of enhanced winds and hazardous 
seas. Today, the local area will reside between systems, with high 
pressure briefly becoming the primary weather influence. This will 
allow for light winds, with seas over the coastal water zones 
subsiding below 10ft by the afternoon. This will be very short-lived 
as winds then begin to increase this evening and tonight ahead of 
the next frontal system. Initially, winds will reach SCA level over 
the coastal waters and west entrance to the Strait before spreading 
into the interior waters around midnight. Model guidance points to 
gale force winds over the east entrance of the Strait and the 
Northern Inland Waters, so a gale watch has been issued with the 
morning forecast update. Generally, expect breezy conditions over 
all waters tonight through Monday morning, with headlines in place.

By Monday afternoon in the wake of the front, winds will become 
breezy out of the W/NW. This will make for continued SCA level winds 
over the coastal waters, with a decent westerly push down the Strait 
of Juan de Fuca where high-end SCA level winds are expected. 
Additionally, NW swells will build above 10ft through Monday evening 
over the coastal waters. 

The next in the series of fronts will then affect area waters on 
Tuesday and into Wednesday where another round of widespread 
headlines is likely. Winds currently are not expected to be as 
strong as the previous system. Swells are likely to remain at or 
just above 10ft. Another system is then expected on Thursday and may 
bring stronger winds to the waters, especially the coastal waters 
and northern interior waters. NW swells may also build towards 15 ft 
with this system. Active weather then likely to continue into next 
weekend as yet another system impacts the area.

Kovacik

&&

.HYDROLOGY...No river flooding is expected for the next 7 days. 
However, with the potential for heavy rain with each of the next 
few frontal systems over the next week, there is some concern for 
potential burn scar debris flows in the recently burned areas.

&&

.SEW WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
WA...Winter Weather Advisory from midnight tonight to 5 AM PDT 
     Tuesday for West Slopes North Cascades and Passes.

PZ...Small Craft Advisory until 11 AM PDT this morning for Coastal 
     Waters From Cape Flattery To James Island 10 To 60 Nm-
     Coastal Waters From Cape Flattery To James Island Out 10 Nm-
     Coastal Waters From James Island To Point Grenville 10 To 
     60 Nm-Coastal Waters From James Island To Point Grenville 
     Out 10 Nm-Coastal Waters From Point Grenville To Cape 
     Shoalwater 10 To 60 Nm-Coastal Waters From Point Grenville 
     To Cape Shoalwater Out 10 Nm-Grays Harbor Bar.

     Small Craft Advisory from 10 PM this evening to 8 AM PDT Monday 
     for West Entrance U.S. Waters Strait Of Juan De Fuca.

     Gale Watch from late tonight through Monday morning for East 
     Entrance U.S. Waters Strait Of Juan De Fuca-Northern Inland 
     Waters Including The San Juan Islands.

     Small Craft Advisory from midnight tonight to noon PDT Monday 
     for Admiralty Inlet-Puget Sound and Hood Canal.

     Small Craft Advisory from 3 PM this afternoon to 5 PM PDT Monday 
     for Coastal Waters From Cape Flattery To James Island 10 To 
     60 Nm-Coastal Waters From Cape Flattery To James Island Out 
     10 Nm-Coastal Waters From James Island To Point Grenville 
     10 To 60 Nm-Coastal Waters From James Island To Point 
     Grenville Out 10 Nm-Coastal Waters From Point Grenville To 
     Cape Shoalwater 10 To 60 Nm-Coastal Waters From Point 
     Grenville To Cape Shoalwater Out 10 Nm.

&&

$$
