FXUS61 KBGM 231858
AFDBGM

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Binghamton NY
258 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
It will remain mainly dry again today, but with increasing 
clouds. A coastal low pressure system will bring a chance for 
light rain showers tonight across areas east of Interstate 81. 
Warm and dry conditions are then expected for Monday and 
Tuesday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
1000 AM Update:

Like yesterday morning, valley locations have been slow to have
temperatures rise due to an inversion. This will quickly change
as the rest of this morning progresses, but had to make some
minor adjustments to hourly temperatures for the next few hours
to account for these latest trends. That being said, overall 
forecast high temperatures for today have not changed. The rest
of the forecast remains on track.

615 AM Update...
No major changes were made to the forecast. Updated temperatures
over the next couple hours based on current temps and trends.

340 AM Update...

Temperatures tonight are going to be tough to nail down as a 
high cirrus shield will cover the eastern half of the CWA with 
most of the western extent remaining clear. This renders most 
guidance moot as a lot of the high res models are not handling 
the current temperatures very well. For tonight's lows, current
temperature trends were used with edits made to account for 
valleys and the high clouds. Some valley fog may develop across
the Chemung basin for a few hours this morning. Winds just above
the surface are forecast to weaken over the next couple hours,
which should allow fog formation to get going given the clear
skies and dewpoint depressions approaching 0.

Sunday will be another wonderful day as high pressure continues
to control the weather for the CWA. Highs will reach the mid 60s 
to low 70s with light winds. Skies will become increasingly 
cloudy from SE to NW as a coastal low moves in from the SE. 

The aforementioned coastal low will encroach on the area
beginning Sunday evening. High pressure centered over western NY
and north central PA will battle the low as it tries to move 
into the area, keeping it from progressing too far westward. Dry
air will also be entrenched over the region ahead of the low's 
arrival, limiting the reach of the precipitation. These two 
factors will limit rain chances to the Catskills and Poconos. A 
few stray showers may make their way into the I-81 corridor but
the dry air and high pressure will make this difficult. Rain 
showers should dissipate or push off to the east by Monday 
morning. 

High pressure is back over the area on Monday and will bring another
abnormally warm day for this time of year. Temperatures will 
reach the mid 60s to low 70s across the region, which is about 
10-12 degrees above normal. Winds are expected to be light and
out of the north with mostly clear skies west of I-81 and partly
sunny skies east of I-81.

&&

.SHORT TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY NIGHT/... 
230 PM Update... 

Onshore flow continues Tuesday and Tuesday night well ahead of a
surface low well off the coast. Showers will be across NEPA and
the Catskills. Late Tuesday night the showers expand northwest
as another low and upper level trough moves northeast up the
Ohio Valley. The low and weakening trough move through Wednesday
evening with rain showers. Showers will be across the entire
area Wednesday then lifting northeast Wednesday night. Rainfall
amounts will be light.

High temperatures Tuesday will be from the mid 60s in the
southern Catskills and Poconos where the most showers will be,
to the lower 70s in the northern Finger Lakes with downslope
drying. With clouds Tuesday night lows will be mostly in the mid
and upper 50s. Wednesday highs will be similar to Tuesday.
Colder air comes in late Wednesday night dropping temperatures
to the mid and upper 40s.  

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
230 PM Update... 

Models in better agreement for Friday and Saturday. A large high
pressure system will sprawl across eastern Ontario and Quebec
Friday then sinks south into our area Saturday. This may even
hold off any showers through Sunday now. Showers will be
approaching from the southeast up the coast and from the
southwest with a low on the front edge of a large upper level
trough. 

Temperatures will slowly warm this period and be near or above
average. Thursday high temperatures will be from the mid 50s to
lower 60s. Sunday highs will be in the upper 50s to lower 60s.
Lows start out from the mid 30s to low 40s Thursday night, then
warms to the upper 30s to the mid 40s Saturday night. 

&&

.AVIATION /19Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Mainly VFR conditions are expected to persist at least through
late tonight/early Monday morning. MVFR are expected to move
into the area from east to west and affect KAVP, KBGM, KELM, 
and possibly KRME. KSYR and and KITH will likely be too far west
to see any ceiling restrictions. IFR ceiling restrictions will 
be possible at KAVP after 12Z.

Outlook...

Monday afternoon through Tuesday night...Mainly VFR expected.

Wednesday...Mainly VFR, but there is a low chance for rain
showers and possible associated restrictions.

Thursday...Mainly VFR.

&&

.BGM WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
PA...None.
NY...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...BJG/JTC
NEAR TERM...BJG/JTC
SHORT TERM...TAC
LONG TERM...TAC
AVIATION...BJG
