FXUS61 KALY 231922
AFDALY

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Albany NY
322 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Showers are expected this evening into Monday morning, 
most widespread east of the Hudson. Showers will diminish on Monday 
but clouds will hang on with seasonable to mild temperatures. Mostly 
cloudy, mild, and humid conditions look to linger into mid-week with 
a few showers.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 315 pm, water vapor imagery shows mid/high moisture 
streaming northward into the Northeast downstream of a cutoff 
low centered around the Outer Banks of NC. Areas of rainfall 
associated with midlevel frontogenesis are located from the 
southern New England coast to Long Island. Some holes in the 
precip shield are developing, and elevated echoes are not 
reaching the ground on the outer edges of the shield. This is 
due to plentiful dry air at mid and low levels sampled on the 
12Z KALY (and to a lesser extent, KOKX) sounding. PoPs increase 
gradually from SE to NW as the dry air is gradually eroded, but 
the majority of the rest of the day will be dry for most of the 
CWA. Some light showers are nearing southern 
Litchfield/Dutchess Counties at the moment.

Tonight, some weak ascent continues due to overrunning and DCVA as a 
plume of PWAT of 1-1.5 inches points into the area. The highest PWAT 
anomalies will be located just east of the forecast area, and dry 
midlevel air will likely still be an issue both in an antecedent 
sense as well as pockets of drier air approaching from the south. 
Meanwhile, midlevel lapse rates steepen and some weak elevated 
instability is noted, particularly east of the Hudson. Owing to 
these conflicting factors, NWP has been all over the place in terms 
of QPF tonight into Monday. This seems like a lower PoP type 
situation, since some of the recent guidance is not bullish on 
precip especially along and west of the Hudson, and this is
supported by early afternoon radar mosaics. Likely PoPs 
confined east of the Hudson and some of the upslope Catskills 
regions, with chance elsewhere. However, there could be some 
locally higher rainfall amounts due to brief heavier downpours 
in convective elements late tonight into Monday morning. The 
probability of any hydro issues is low, however, as consensus 
does favor better probabilities of the 1+ inch amounts staying 
off to the east. A slight chance of thunder was added to the 
forecast mainly for western New England late tonight into Monday
morning. It should be fairly mild tonight with lows in the 
mid-40s to low 50s. 

Monday, will trend PoPs downward through the day as forcing breaks 
down and midlevel dry air exerts more of an influence. However, low 
clouds will be tough to scour out. NBM guidance is picking up on 
this more today, with mostly cloudy skies for the majority of the 
forecast area. Hedged below NBM guidance for highs given the 
prevalence of low clouds, with mainly upper 50s/low 60s. Some
drizzle/light showers will linger for higher elevations. Far 
western parts of the ADKs/Mohawk Valley have a better shot at a 
brighter day with highs possibly in the mid- upper 60s.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH TUESDAY NIGHT/...
During the short term period, an anomalous midlevel ridge centered 
over the North Atlantic will fold westward into the Northeastern US, 
with shortwave ridging from Lake Erie to the Deep South. Between 
these features, a weakness of the height field will exist in the 
vicinity of the forecast area, remnants of the cutoff low now over 
the Outer Banks. PWATs in excess of an inch will remain over the 
local area, with 850 mb temps in the low teens, both +1 to +2 SD, 
as persistent southeasterly 850 mb flow will keep a mild, maritime 
airmass over the region. Though forcing for ascent will be somewhat 
disorganized, periodic showers are possible during the period. 
Otherwise, mild and humid weather is expected. Highs Tuesday have 
the potential to reach near 70F in the valleys if clouds clear out, 
but we hedged more pessimistic with the sky cover as forecast 
soundings show stubborn low clouds remaining. It will still be 
seasonably mild with highs in the 60s most areas. It will likely 
cloud up at night for anywhere that cleared out during the daytime 
period, possibly with areas of drizzle and fog. This will lead to 
very mild nights with lows mainly in the 50s (closer to normal highs 
for this time of year). 

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
An anomalously warm and moist air mass (850 mb temperature anomalies 
and PWAT anomalies of +1 to +2 STDEV) will be in place across our 
region on Wednesday. A potent, but weakening upper level trough wave 
trough will be approaching from the Ohio Valley region late in the 
day. This system is expected to bring at least scattered showers, 
especially given the moist environment. Chances for showers linger 
through Wednesday evening as the trough passes through. The system's 
surface cold front looks to move across the area into early Thursday 
morning. 

A much drier and cooler air mass will start to build in on Thursday, 
courtesy of N-NW flow developing as a large area of high pressure 
builds eastward across SE Canada and the Great Lakes. This high is 
expected to take residence across our region Friday through the 
weekend, bringing mainly clear skies, light winds and seasonable 
temperatures.

Looking further ahead, the 6-10 day outlook from the Climate 
Prediction Center indicates a high probability favoring above normal 
temperatures developing next week, with precipitation near
normal.

&&

.AVIATION /19Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Through 18z/Mon...VFR conditions will start the period with just 
some high clouds around. Ceilings will lower tonight into Monday as 
a coastal low drifts northward. Showers should begin from south to 
north later this afternoon through this evening, though will have to 
battle some dry air before precipitation reaches the ground, so 
timing of precip is a bit uncertain. Will begin with VCSH wording, 
then transition to shower wording a few hours afterward. Showers 
will also be intermittent so there will be some periods of dry 
weather between showers. Precipitation will be light to start so not 
expecting much in the way of reduced vsbys. Ceilings should trend 
down to low end VFR then to MVFR tonight. Some IFR ceilings cannot 
be ruled out late tonight into Monday morning. Higher confidence for 
this is at KPOU/KPSF. A few showers are expected to linger for much 
of Monday as well. Some drizzle is possible as well. Ceilings will 
struggle to lift much if at all on Monday (remaining IFR/MVFR).

Wind will be mainly north to northeasterly at 3-6 kt through Monday.

Outlook...

Monday Night: Low Operational Impact. Slight Chance of SHRA.
Tuesday: Moderate Operational Impact. Chance of SHRA.
Tuesday Night: Moderate Operational Impact. Chance of SHRA.
Wednesday: Moderate Operational Impact. Chance of SHRA.
Wednesday Night: Moderate Operational Impact. Chance of SHRA.
Thursday: No Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.
Thursday Night: No Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.
Friday: No Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.

&&

.ALY WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CT...None.
NY...None.
MA...None.
VT...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Thompson
NEAR TERM...Thompson
SHORT TERM...Thompson
LONG TERM...JPV 
AVIATION...Rathbun
