FXUS61 KBUF 232044
AFDBUF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Buffalo NY
444 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Warm and primarily calm weather will continue tonight and into 
the middle of the work week as high pressure currently centered 
over the Canadian Maritimes ridges back across the Eastern Great
Lakes region. During this time, temperatures will be well above
normal with highs averaging in the upper 60s to low 70s.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...

A strong ridge of high pressure will persist across western and 
north central NY and maintain mostly dry and calm weather 
tonight. Clouds will increase and thicken across the region 
especially east of Lake Ontario as a closed low tracks from the 
Outer Banks inland and over northern Virginia tonight. A coastal warm
front will send rain showers inland, with the western periphery
of moisture and showers possibly clipping our region late 
tonight. Best chance for light showers will be across Lewis 
County late tonight. Low temperatures will reach the mid 40s to
low 50s tonight.

Rain chances will end across Lewis county early Monday morning.
A strong mid-level ridge will approach from the Ohio Valley
during the day. Increasing subsidence and dry air will result 
in another dry, warm and calm day. Highs will reach the upper 
60s to low 70s.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY NIGHT/...
Monday night a weakening mid level low will open up into a weak 
trough before gradually dissipating over New England by Tuesday 
morning. This system will result in some cloud cover, but any rain 
associated with this system will be to the east of the area. 
Otherwise an expansive area of high pressure surface and aloft will 
remain centered from Quebec southward across the eastern Great Lakes 
through Tuesday, providing more dry and warm weather. An upstream 
trough and surface low will move into the Ohio Valley Tuesday night, 
but any rain with this system will remain to our west through 
Tuesday night. Tuesday may be the warmest day we'll see for a while, 
with highs in the lower to mid 70s across lower elevations and 
around 70 for higher terrain. Lows Monday night will be in the mid 
40s to lower 50s in most areas. A southerly breeze will keep lows 
even warmer Tuesday night, with mid 50s in most areas. 

A southern stream mid level trough and associated surface low will 
move from the Ohio Valley Wednesday morning to the eastern Great 
Lakes Wednesday evening before reaching southern Quebec Thursday 
morning. Increasing large scale forcing in advance of the trough 
combined with low level moisture transport and convergence 
associated with the surface low and cold front will bring an 
increasing chance of showers from southwest to northeast on 
Wednesday. Temperatures aloft will still be quite warm, with highs 
in the lower 70s likely for lower elevations since latest guidance 
suggests that showers will hold off until later in the afternoon. 
The cold front will sweep east across the area Wednesday night with 
showers ending from west to east. A northwest flow of cooler air may 
support some lake effect clouds and a few sprinkles southeast of 
Lake Erie and Lake Ontario later Wednesday night.

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
Expansive Canadian high pressure centered over the Upper Great Lakes 
at the start of this period will steadily build eastward across our 
region through Friday...before slowly drifting east to the New 
England coastline over the course of next weekend. This will provide 
our region with a prolonged period of fair dry weather...with just a 
few lingering lake-driven sprinkles possible southeast of the lakes 
Thursday morning. 

The surface high will also be accompanied by a much cooler 
airmass...which will be reflected by high temperatures falling back 
to the mid-upper 50s for both Thursday and Friday...before slowly 
climbing back into the upper 50s to lower 60s over the weekend as 
our airmass gradually modifies. While such readings will be notably 
cooler than the warmth of earlier in the week...these will still 
actually be near to a little bit above average for the end of 
October.

&&

.AVIATION /21Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
VFR flight conditions will continue across western and north central 
NY through the TAF period (18z Mon.)

Cirrus will expand today and clouds will further thicken tonight as 
a coastal low slowly moves north along the Mid-Atlantic coast. 
Ceilings will stay VFR and above 5k ft through Monday morning. A few 
showers are possible across the Tug Hill region late tonight however 
any showers should stay east of KART. 

Outlook... 

Monday through Tuesday...VFR.
Wednesday and Wednesday night...MVFR/VFR. A chance of showers.
Thursday and Friday...VFR.

&&

.MARINE...
Light winds will keep waves negligible as a broad ridge of high 
pressure over the Canadian Maritimes nudges back west across the 
region today through the middle portion of the week. All this being 
said, small craft advisory criteria is not expected during this time.

&&

.BUF WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NY...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$

SYNOPSIS...EAJ/HSK
NEAR TERM...HSK/Thomas
SHORT TERM...Apffel
LONG TERM...Hitchcock/JJR
AVIATION...HSK
MARINE...EAJ/HSK
