FXUS61 KOKX 231815
AFDOKX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service New York NY
215 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A slow moving system will produce unsettled weather through the 
beginning of the week. Offshore low moves to the northward 
towards Gulf of Maine Wednesday into Wednesday night. A cold 
front moves across late Wednesday night into early Thursday. 
High pressure from the Great Lakes builds in thereafter through 
Friday. High pressure begins to depart towards next weekend with
another low potentially approaching from the south.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH TONIGHT/...
Closed upper low off the SE US coast partially shears into
longwave troughing across the Western 2/3rd of the country
through Monday, resulting in a deep sub-tropical moisture feed 
(+2-3 PWAT) into the region through Monday. At the surface, a
warm front lifts towards the NE US coast region this afternoon 
into tonight, likely arriving just offshore.

Initial band of frontogenetically forced light to moderate 
rainfall, oriented E to W just south of LI and into Central NJ 
will continue pivot NE into the region through this evening. 
Likely stalling and weakening overhead tonight. The pcpn could 
transition to a light rain and dz scenario for a period of time 
as the deep moisture is lost this evening, but with continued 
deep SE flow (slightly strengthening llj) and shearing upper low
drifting up the coast, it appears marginal elevated instability
develops late this evening into the overnight (particularly SE 
portions of the region), with models indicating a narrow warm 
conveyor belt of heavy downpours (embedded tstms possible) 
lifting up the coast. Uncertainty on where this WCB axis 
orients, but the synoptic lift and continued moisture feed 
should help re-invigorate shower activity overnight into Monday 
morning, potentially heavy with isolated tstm across LI/CT. 

Otherwise, seasonably mild today and unseasonably mild and 
humid tonight in the sub-tropical flow, despite clouds, ne flow
and rain. NE winds pick up ahead of approaching warm front this
aft/eve, with NE winds as high as 15-20g25mph for the coast 
into this evening. This gradient weakens overnight as high 
pressure continue to retreat north.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY THROUGH TUESDAY NIGHT/...
The main question is how long the stratus, light rain, and dz 
persist. Although the NAM is usually overdone with the bl moisture, 
the 00Z GFS supports it. 

Based on this, the NBM may be overly optimistic with cloud cover, 
pops, and the resultant temps. Stuck with output for now because the 
time scale is a little too far out to completely buy in, but the 
fcst may need to be trended cloudier, cooler, and a little wetter 
thru the period, especially Mon. The rain is not expected to be
significant attm, just light, periodic pcpn due to a lack of 
lift and deep moisture.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH SATURDAY/...
On the large scale, mid level strong ridge over the Western 
Atlantic in place for midweek. Local region remains on the 
western side of this ridge. Multiple embedded shortwaves 
approach and move across the region Wednesday through early 
Thursday. Ridging gets reinforced across the area for the rest 
of Thursday through Friday. Another mid level trough approaches 
for next weekend.

At the surface, weak low pressure moves northward in the Western 
Atlantic, getting close to Gulf of Maine Wednesday into Wednesday 
night. A cold front associated with a parent low farther to the 
north and west moves across the local region late Wednesday night 
into early Thursday.

The chances for rain showers will be higher during the day Wednesday 
into early Wednesday evening and then just a slight chance 
thereafter with the cold frontal passage. The cold front will not 
have much moisture associated with it. There are model 
differences with the position of the low and shortwave energy 
aloft. Some models have more influence from low pressure 
offshore, keeping the high pressure area relatively farther 
away.

Overall consensus of models shows though, that high pressure will 
build enough into the region from the Great Lakes and will be 
relatively strong magnitude to make for a return to dry weather 
conditions Thursday through Friday. 

Model uncertainty becomes apparent again thereafter for next weekend 
with high pressure center staying mainly north of the area. However, 
some model solutions keep more rain towards the local area with more 
offshore low pressure influence. Slight chance POPs for rain showers 
return to forecast Friday night with low end chance POPs for
rain showers for Saturday.

Temperatures in the long term will be relatively warmest Wednesday 
and Thursday with mid 60s to near 70 for highs. Highs forecast more 
in the upper 50s to lower 60s for Friday and Saturday.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Low pressure east of the Delmarva will move little through the
forecast period, and begin to weaken late tonight into Monday.
Meanwhile high pressure remains to the north of the terminals.

VFR conditions at the beginning of the TAF period will be
lowering to MVFR with light to moderate rain. Conditions
continue to lower late afternoon into this evening to IFR with 
LIFR at the Long Island terminals. IFR continues into Monday 
morning, however, there may be improvement to MVFR at the NYC 
metro terminals and west. There are timing uncertainties with 
the lowering conditions through this evening.

Winds NE 10-15 kt with gusts near 20 kt at the coastal
terminals, inland winds will be N to NE 5 to 10 kt. Gusts may be
more occasional. NE winds 5 to around 10 kt will continue
through the forecast period.


 ...NY Metro (KEWR/KLGA/KJFK/KTEB) TAF Uncertainty... 

Amendments expected for timing and extent of lowering
conditions. IFR likely this evening, with LIFR at times along
the coast. Gusts this afternoon into this evening may be more
occasional. Timing of improvements Monday is uncertain.


.OUTLOOK FOR 18Z MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY... 
.Monday afternoon...Chance of light rain, mainly east of NYC 
terminals. MVFR likely at the NYC metro terminals and west, IFR 
to the east.
.Tuesday-Wednesday...Chance of light rain with MVFR to IFR
conditions.
.Thursday-Friday...VFR.

Detailed information, including hourly TAF wind component forecasts, 
can be found at: https:/www.weather.gov/zny/n90

&&

.MARINE...
SCA wind and seas expected on the ocean thru tngt. Latest
guidance indicating a period of 25kt gusts for eastern LIS,
eastern bays, and southern bays this afternoon into tonight.
Elsewhere, an ocnl gust to 25 cannot be ruled out this aft/eve.

Winds lighten late tonight into Mon, with easterly ocean wind 
waves subsiding Monday. Winds and seas are expected to remain 
blw sca lvls on Tue. 

Mainly below SCA conditions expected Wed through Fri with a 
potential return to SCA seas on the ocean in the forecast Fri night. 
Otherwise, sub-SCA conditions are forecast to continue on non-
ocean waters.

&&

.HYDROLOGY...
1/2 to 1" of rainfall likely for E LI and SE CT through Monday,
lesser amounts to the west. This could be locally higher 
depending on orientation of warm conveyor belt.

No widespread hydrologic impacts are expected through Saturday.

&&

.OKX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CT...None.
NY...None.
NJ...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 6 AM EDT Monday for ANZ332-340-345.
     Small Craft Advisory until 11 AM EDT Monday for ANZ350-353-355.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...12/JM
NEAR TERM...12/NV
SHORT TERM...12
LONG TERM...JM
AVIATION...MET
MARINE...12/JM/NV
HYDROLOGY...12/JM
