FXUS61 KOKX 231949
AFDOKX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service New York NY
349 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A weak coastal low and associated frontal system will affect 
the waters through Tuesday. The weak low will dissipate over the
Mid Atlantic region on Tuesday while another weak low 
approaches from the southeast for midweek. This low will pass 
just east of New England Wednesday night while a cold front 
moves through the area. Strengthening high pressure over the 
Plains and upper Great Lakes will then build just north of the 
area and remain in control through the weekend. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
Closed upper low off the SE US coast partially shears into 
longwave troughing across the Western 2/3rd of the country 
through Monday, resulting in a deep sub-tropical moisture feed 
(+2-3 PWAT) into the region through Monday. At the surface, an 
inverted trough/warm front lifts towards the NE US coast region 
tonight, likely arriving just offshore by daybreak.

NE-SW oriented band of frontogenetically forced light to 
moderate rainfall (moderate to locally heavy across E LI/SE CT),
will continue to slowly pivot NW into interior portions of the 
region through this evening. The rain band will be come more 
disorganized this evening as it works NW into drier air and 
against stronger surface ridging. In the wake of the 
frontogenetic band, rain should transition to a brief period of 
light rain and dz from SE to NW this evening as deep moisture is
lost.

Models seems to be in better agreement that this respite will 
be short-lived though. With continued deep SE flow (strengthened
S llj) and shearing upper low drifting up the coast, it appears
deeper moisture and elevated instability advect into the region
overnight into Monday (particularly E portions of the region). 
This seems to manifest in a warm conveyor belt of scattered 
heavy downpours (embedded tstms possible) lifting up the coast. 
Uncertainty on where the main focus of the WCB axis orients 
(over E LI/SE CT or east of that), but the synoptic lift and 
continued moisture feed should help re-invigorate shower 
activity overnight and continuing through Monday morning. The 
highest probability for training locally heavy downpours with 
isolated tstms appears to be across LI/CT. HRRR indicating 
potential for rainfall rates to approach 1"/hr in the heaviest 
activity late tonight into Monday, with SPC HREF indicating a 
low prob of 3"/3hr where training occurs. Overall, this equates 
to a general threat of minor urban and poor drainage flooding in
vicinity of training cells late tonight into Monday afternoon, 
with a low and localized threat for flash flooding.

Synoptic forcing slowly weakens Mon afternoon as elongated and 
sheared trough axis weakens just to the southwest, combined with a 
weakened thermal gradient as warm front/coastal front slides 
westward. This will allow for a weakening of WCB and a general 
transition to spotty light rain and drizzle. 

Otherwise, unseasonably mild and humid tonight and seasonably mild 
on Monday in the sub-tropical flow, despite clouds, ne flow and 
rain. 

NE winds as high as 15-20g25mph continue for the coast through this 
evening. This gradient weakens overnight as high pressure continue 
to retreat north. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT/...
Sheared trough axis weakens continues to weaken Monday night, while 
at the surface the weak coastal/warm front will continue to weaken 
and push west of the Hudson river. Moist low-level E flow, 
strenthening low level flow, and strong inversion aloft points to 
widespread stratus and drizzle and patchy fog, with better 
chance of showers across western portions of the region in 
vicinity of coastal front. Otherwise, another unseasonably mild 
night well into the 50s. 

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
Strong upper level ridging out over the Atlantic will begin to 
weaken to start this time frame, caught in a squeeze play between a 
weak non-tropical low moving NW through it toward New England, 
troughing extending from off the SE coast up into the Mid Atlantic 
region, and a potent southern stream cutoff low advancing from the S 
Plains and Mississippi valley and kicking the aforementioned systems 
off to the east Wed night. 

A weak sfc low associated with the nearby trough to the west should 
dissipate on Tue over the Mid Atlantic region, but associated rain 
bands should hang on into Wed especially from the NYC metro area 
west as mid and upper level forcing continues and then moves across. 
Most of the precip with the offshore low should remain tied to low 
level WAA to its east as it moves close to the 40N/70W benchmark Wed 
AM, impacting eastern New England. The srn stream kicker cutoff low 
meanwhile should lift NE through the OH valley and ern Great Lakes 
Wed into Wed night, with an associated cold front passing through 
late Wed night and ushering in dry/cooler wx to finish the week and 
last through the weekend. Rejected NBM idea of 20-30 PoP for 
Saturday/Sunday with deterministic model guidance insisting on the 
high remaining dominant during this time frame. 

Mild temps to start the time frame will return closer to normal for 
Fri/Sat after the cold frontal passage, then moderate somewhat on 
Sunday. 

&&

.AVIATION /20Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Low pressure east of the Delmarva will move little through the
forecast period, and begin to weaken late tonight into Monday.
Meanwhile high pressure remains to the north of the terminals.

VFR conditions at the beginning of the TAF period will be
lowering to MVFR with light to moderate rain. Conditions
continue to lower late afternoon into this evening to IFR with 
LIFR at the Long Island terminals. IFR continues into Monday 
morning, however, there may be improvement to MVFR at the NYC 
metro terminals and west. There are timing uncertainties with 
the lowering conditions through this evening.

Winds NE 10-15 kt with gusts near 20 kt at the coastal
terminals, inland winds will be N to NE 5 to 10 kt. Gusts may be
more occasional. NE winds 5 to around 10 kt will continue
through the forecast period.


 ...NY Metro (KEWR/KLGA/KJFK/KTEB) TAF Uncertainty... 

Amendments expected for timing and extent of lowering
conditions. IFR likely this evening, with LIFR at times along
the coast. Gusts this afternoon into this evening may be more
occasional. Timing of improvements Monday is uncertain.


.OUTLOOK FOR 18Z MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY... 
.Monday afternoon...Chance of light rain, mainly east of NYC 
terminals. MVFR likely at the NYC metro terminals and west, IFR 
to the east.
.Tuesday-Wednesday...Chance of light rain with MVFR to IFR
conditions.
.Thursday-Friday...VFR.

Detailed information, including hourly TAF wind component forecasts, 
can be found at: https:/www.weather.gov/zny/n90

&&

.MARINE...
SCA winds expected on the ocean thru late tonight, with accompnaying 
sees of 6 to 9 ft. Latest guidance still indicating a period of 25kt 
gusts for eastern LIS, eastern bays, and southern bays this 
afternoon thru this evening. Elsewhere, an ocnl gust to 25kt cannot 
be ruled out thru this eve.

Winds lighten late tonight into Mon, with easterly ocean wind waves 
gradually subsiding Monday. Winds and seas are expected to remain 
blw sca lvls through mid week.

As strengthening high pressure builds to the north, persistent NE 
flow on its srn flank may lead to minimal SCA conds on the ocean 
waters especially E of Fire Island Inlet Fri into Fri night, with 
winds gusts up to 235 kt and seas up to 5 ft.

&&

.HYDROLOGY...
1 to 1 1/2" of rainfall likely across E LI and SE CT through Monday, 
tapering to 1/4 to 1/2" of rainfall west of the Hudson River. This 
could be locally higher depending on orientation of warm conveyor 
belt. Rainfall rates approaching 1"/hr possible in the heaviest 
activity late tonight into Monday, with SPC HREF indicating a low 
prob of 3"/3hr where training occurs.

Overall, this equates to a threat of minor urban and poor drainage 
flooding in vicinity of training cells late tonight into Monday
afternoon, with a low and localized threat for flash flooding.

Otherwise, no widespread hydrologic impacts are expected through the 
week.

&&

.OKX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CT...None.
NY...None.
NJ...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 6 AM EDT Monday for ANZ332-340-345.
     Small Craft Advisory until 11 AM EDT Monday for ANZ350-353-355.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...BG/NV
NEAR TERM...NV
SHORT TERM...NV
LONG TERM...BG
AVIATION...MET
MARINE...BG/NV
HYDROLOGY...BG/NV
