FXUS61 KBGM 231931
AFDBGM

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Binghamton NY
331 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A coastal low pressure system will bring a chance for light 
rain showers tonight, mainly across areas east of Interstate 
81. A few showers may linger into Monday for the Poconos and
Catskills, but the majority of the area will see mainly dry
conditions. Additional chances for some showers will persist for
Tuesday and especially Wednesday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY NIGHT/...
330 PM Update:

Increasing moisture from a weak coastal low pressure system off
of the Mid-Atlantic coast continues to surge northward, bringing
increased cloud cover to parts of the area, especially east of
I-81. Some light rain showers have already made its way to the 
Poconos to the Catskills, but the majority of the precipitation
remains south and east of the area.

The coastal low pressure system will make its closest pass to
the region tonight, which will bring a chance for rain showers
to the area, especially east of I-81. While latest trends have
been to bring these rain showers farther north and west, these
rain showers are expected to be on the lighter side, and
therefore overall QPF looks rather unimpressive. That being
said, some of these showers may make it as far west as parts of
the Finger Lakes Region tonight, while it previously looked to
remain well east of there. At the very least, much of the area
will be mostly cloudy tonight. This will prevent much in the way
of radiational cooling and therefore low temperatures are only
expected to be in the mid 40s to lower 50s.

High pressure builds back in for Monday as the coastal low
weakens and continues to move away from the area. That being
said, there will still be a chance for a few lingering showers
across the area, especially across the Poconos-Catskills. Mostly
sunny skies are expected west of I-81, but lingering low level
moisture will keep skies mostly cloudy for most areas east of
I-81. As a result, temperatures will be warmest across the
Finger Lakes Region (mainly upper 60s to lower 70s), with upper
50s to mid 60s expected east of I-81 (lowest values across the
Poconos-Catskills with more cloud cover).

There are some indications of additional showers or drizzle pivoting
in from the east across the Poconos-Catskills Monday night with
a moist onshore flow. Otherwise, partly cloudy to mostly cloudy
skies are expected with lows in the upper 40s to mid 50s.

&&

.SHORT TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY NIGHT/...
230 PM Update... 

Onshore flow continues Tuesday and Tuesday night well ahead of a
surface low well off the coast. Showers will be across NEPA and
the Catskills. Late Tuesday night the showers expand northwest
as another low and upper level trough moves northeast up the
Ohio Valley. The low and weakening trough move through Wednesday
evening with rain showers. Showers will be across the entire
area Wednesday then lifting northeast Wednesday night. Rainfall
amounts will be light.

High temperatures Tuesday will be from the mid 60s in the
southern Catskills and Poconos where the most showers will be,
to the lower 70s in the northern Finger Lakes with downslope
drying. With clouds Tuesday night lows will be mostly in the mid
and upper 50s. Wednesday highs will be similar to Tuesday.
Colder air comes in late Wednesday night dropping temperatures
to the mid and upper 40s.

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
230 PM Update... 

Models in better agreement for Friday and Saturday. A large high
pressure system will sprawl across eastern Ontario and Quebec
Friday then sinks south into our area Saturday. This may even
hold off any showers through Sunday now. Showers will be
approaching from the southeast up the coast and from the
southwest with a low on the front edge of a large upper level
trough. 

Temperatures will slowly warm this period and be near or above
average. Thursday high temperatures will be from the mid 50s to
lower 60s. Sunday highs will be in the upper 50s to lower 60s.
Lows start out from the mid 30s to low 40s Thursday night, then
warms to the upper 30s to the mid 40s Saturday night.

&&

.AVIATION /19Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Mainly VFR conditions are expected to persist at least through
late tonight/early Monday morning. MVFR are expected to move
into the area from east to west and affect KAVP, KBGM, KELM, 
and possibly KRME. KSYR and and KITH will likely be too far west
to see any ceiling restrictions. IFR ceiling restrictions will 
be possible at KAVP after 12Z.

Outlook...

Monday afternoon through Tuesday night...Mainly VFR expected.

Wednesday...Mainly VFR, but there is a low chance for rain
showers and possible associated restrictions.

Thursday...Mainly VFR.

&&

.BGM WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
PA...None.
NY...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...BJG
NEAR TERM...BJG
SHORT TERM...TAC
LONG TERM...TAC
AVIATION...BJG
