FXUS61 KBGM 231748
AFDBGM

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Binghamton NY
148 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
It will remain mainly dry again today, but with increasing 
clouds. A coastal low pressure system will bring a chance for 
light rain showers tonight across areas east of Interstate 81. 
Warm and dry conditions are then expected for Monday and 
Tuesday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
1000 AM Update:

Like yesterday morning, valley locations have been slow to have
temperatures rise due to an inversion. This will quickly change
as the rest of this morning progresses, but had to make some
minor adjustments to hourly temperatures for the next few hours
to account for these latest trends. That being said, overall 
forecast high temperatures for today have not changed. The rest
of the forecast remains on track.

615 AM Update...
No major changes were made to the forecast. Updated temperatures
over the next couple hours based on current temps and trends.

340 AM Update...

Temperatures tonight are going to be tough to nail down as a 
high cirrus shield will cover the eastern half of the CWA with 
most of the western extent remaining clear. This renders most 
guidance moot as a lot of the high res models are not handling 
the current temperatures very well. For tonight's lows, current
temperature trends were used with edits made to account for 
valleys and the high clouds. Some valley fog may develop across
the Chemung basin for a few hours this morning. Winds just above
the surface are forecast to weaken over the next couple hours,
which should allow fog formation to get going given the clear
skies and dewpoint depressions approaching 0.

Sunday will be another wonderful day as high pressure continues
to control the weather for the CWA. Highs will reach the mid 60s 
to low 70s with light winds. Skies will become increasingly 
cloudy from SE to NW as a coastal low moves in from the SE. 

The aforementioned coastal low will encroach on the area
beginning Sunday evening. High pressure centered over western NY
and north central PA will battle the low as it tries to move 
into the area, keeping it from progressing too far westward. Dry
air will also be entrenched over the region ahead of the low's 
arrival, limiting the reach of the precipitation. These two 
factors will limit rain chances to the Catskills and Poconos. A 
few stray showers may make their way into the I-81 corridor but
the dry air and high pressure will make this difficult. Rain 
showers should dissipate or push off to the east by Monday 
morning. 

High pressure is back over the area on Monday and will bring another
abnormally warm day for this time of year. Temperatures will 
reach the mid 60s to low 70s across the region, which is about 
10-12 degrees above normal. Winds are expected to be light and
out of the north with mostly clear skies west of I-81 and partly
sunny skies east of I-81.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH WEDNESDAY NIGHT/...
405 AM Update...
Onshore flow will develop Monday night, bringing low clouds,
patchy fog, and drizzle into the Catskills and Poconos lingering
into Tuesday, while Partly Sunny skies prevail to the west.
Temperatures will remain above normal, with lower to middle 60s
east, increasing to the lower-70s across the Finger Lakes. 

Southeasterly flow will increase again Tuesday night into
Wednesday morning, enhancing the marine layer over the Catskills
and Poconos again. Meanwhile, a weak cold front will be moving
across the Great Lakes, passing through our area Wednesday night
into Thursday morning, as a shortwave trough ejects across
western NY. This will increase the chances for rain showers 
across the area, with generally light accumulation.

&&

.LONG TERM /THURSDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...
405 AM Update...
High pressure will sprawl across eastern Ontario and Quebec
Thursday night, as the cold front moves offshore. Dry north to
northeasterly flow will promote cooler temperatures. Meanwhile,
a subtropical low offshore will drift westward across the 
Atlantic, but looks to remain well to our east. Dry conditions 
look to prevail into next weekend.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Mainly VFR conditions are expected to persist at least through
late tonight/early Monday morning. MVFR are expected to move
into the area from east to west and affect KAVP, KBGM, KELM, 
and possibly KRME. KSYR and and KITH will likely be too far west
to see any ceiling restrictions. IFR ceiling restrictions will 
be possible at KAVP after 12Z.

Outlook...

Monday afternoon through Tuesday night...Mainly VFR expected.

Wednesday...Mainly VFR, but there is a low chance for rain
showers and possible associated restrictions.

Thursday...Mainly VFR.

&&

.BGM WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
PA...None.
NY...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...BJG/JTC
NEAR TERM...BJG/JTC
SHORT TERM...MPH
LONG TERM...MPH
AVIATION...BJG
