FXUS61 KALY 231823
AFDALY

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Albany NY
223 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Expect increasing clouds today before showers arrive late this 
afternoon into tonight, especially for areas south and east of 
the Capital District. Clouds, cooler temperatures and a few 
showers linger into Monday, again mainly areas along and east of
the Hudson River. Milder temperatures then return for the 
middle of the week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 135 pm, water vapor imagery shows mid/high moisture 
streaming northward into the Northeast downstream of a cutoff 
low centered around the Outer Banks of NC. Areas of rainfall 
associated with midlevel frontogenesis are located from the 
southern New England coast to Long Island. Some holes in the 
precip shield are developing, and elevated echoes are not 
reaching the ground on the outer edges of the shield. This is 
due to plentiful dry air at mid and low levels sampled on the 
12Z KALY (and to a lesser extent, KOKX) sounding. PoPs increase 
gradually from SE to NW as the dry air is gradually eroded, but 
the majority of the rest of the day will be dry for most of the 
CWA. Likely PoPs reach southern Litchfield/Dutchess by 00Z Mon.

Tonight, some weak ascent continues due to overrunning and DCVA as a 
plume of PWAT of 1-1.5 inches points into the area. The highest PWAT 
anomalies will be located just east of the forecast area, and dry 
midlevel air will likely still be an issue both in an antecedent 
sense as well as pockets of drier air approaching from the south. 
Meanwhile, midlevel lapse rates steepen and some weak elevated 
instability is noted, particularly east of the Hudson. Owing to 
these conflicting factors, NWP has been all over the place in terms 
of QPF tonight into Monday. This seems like a lower PoP type 
situation, since some of the recent guidance is not bullish on 
precip especially along and west of the Hudson. Likely PoPs
confined east of the Hudson and some of the upslope Catskills
regions, with chance elsewhere. However, there could be some 
locally higher rainfall amounts due to brief heavier downpours 
in convective elements late tonight into Monday morning. The 
probability of any hydro issues is low, however, as consensus 
does favor most of the 1+ inch amounts staying off to the east. 
A slight chance of thunder was added to the forecast mainly for 
western New England late tonight into Monday morning. It should 
be fairly mild tonight with lows in the mid-40s to low 50s. 

Monday, will trend PoPs downward through the day as forcing breaks 
down and midlevel dry air exerts more of an influence. However, low 
clouds will be tough to scour out. NBM guidance is picking up on 
this more today, with mostly cloudy skies for the majority of the 
forecast area. Hedged below NBM guidance for highs given the 
prevalence of low clouds, with mainly upper 50s/low 60s. Some
drizzle/light showers will linger for higher elevations. Far 
western parts of the ADKs/Mohawk Valley have a better shot at a 
brighter day with highs possibly in the mid- upper 60s.

&&

.SHORT TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH TUESDAY NIGHT/...
Any breaks in the sky coverage likely fill back in by Mon night
with overcast skies expected. This will keep temperatures mild 
once again. Weak overrunning continues which would support 
drizzle or light showers, especially from the Capital District 
south and east.

Onshore flow continues into Tuesday as the upper level trough
gradually diminishes overhead but high pressure anchored off 
the Canadian Maritimes retrogrades inland. While we show warmer
high temperatures compared to Monday rising into the low to mid
60s, the southeast flow combined with mostly cloudy skies and 
some lingering patchy drizzle all could trend temperatures 
downward in future updates. 

Cloudy skies once again will at least make for a mild Tues night
with overnight lows only dropping into the mid to upper 50s.
Patchy drizzle could continue so maintained slight chance POPs.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH SATURDAY/...
Upper impulse tracks northwest of our region in southwest upper flow 
Wednesday, departing Wednesday night and Thursday morning. The 
associated cold front is expected to weaken as it tracks through and 
the associated low level forcing will be weakening as well. So, 
there will be considerable moisture associated with the system but 
with the upper dynamics tracking well north and west and the weak 
low level forcing, suggesting scattered showers Wednesday and 
Wednesday night. Highs Wednesday in the mid to upper 60s with near 
70 in some parts of the Hudson Valley and lower 60s higher terrain.

Drying and clearing trend Thursday with highs in the mid to upper 
60s and mid 50s to around 60 higher terrain. Continued dry Friday 
but there could be some increase in clouds through the day. Highs 
Friday in the upper 50s to lower 60s with lower to mid 50s higher 
terrain.

There are considerable differences in sources of guidance/ensembles 
in the Friday night through Saturday time frame. Some guidance 
suggests dry weather with flat upper ridging and other guidance 
suggests upper energy and deep moisture tracking into our region 
with chances for rain. Will indicate more clouds than sun and 
scattered showers Saturday but lots of uncertainty and we have lots 
of time to watch the evolution. Highs Saturday in the mid 50s to 
near 60 with lower 50s higher terrain.

&&

.AVIATION /19Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Through 18z/Mon...VFR conditions will start the period with just 
some high clouds around. Ceilings will lower tonight into Monday as 
a coastal low drifts northward. Showers should begin from south to 
north later this afternoon through this evening, though will have to 
battle some dry air before precipitation reaches the ground, so 
timing of precip is a bit uncertain. Will begin with VCSH wording, 
then transition to shower wording a few hours afterward. Showers 
will also be intermittent so there will be some periods of dry 
weather between showers. Precipitation will be light to start so not 
expecting much in the way of reduced vsbys. Ceilings should trend 
down to low end VFR then to MVFR tonight. Some IFR ceilings cannot 
be ruled out late tonight into Monday morning. Higher confidence for 
this is at KPOU/KPSF. A few showers are expected to linger for much 
of Monday as well. Some drizzle is possible as well. Ceilings will 
struggle to lift much if at all on Monday (remaining IFR/MVFR).

Wind will be mainly north to northeasterly at 3-6 kt through Monday.

Outlook...

Monday Night: Low Operational Impact. Slight Chance of SHRA.
Tuesday: Low Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.
Tuesday Night: Low Operational Impact. Slight Chance of SHRA.
Wednesday: Moderate Operational Impact. Scattered SHRA.
Wednesday Night: Moderate Operational Impact. Scattered SHRA.
Thursday: Low Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.
Thursday Night: No Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.
Friday: No Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.

&&

.ALY WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CT...None.
NY...None.
MA...None.
VT...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Speciale
NEAR TERM...Thompson
SHORT TERM...Speciale
LONG TERM...NAS
AVIATION...Rathbun
