FXUS61 KALY 231758
AFDALY

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Albany NY
158 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Expect increasing clouds today before showers arrive late this 
afternoon into tonight, especially for areas south and east of 
the Capital District. Clouds, cooler temperatures and a few 
showers linger into Monday, again mainly areas along and east of
the Hudson River. Milder temperatures then return for the 
middle of the week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH 6 PM THIS EVENING/... As of 135 pm, water 
vapor imagery shows mid/high moisture streaming northward into 
the Northeast downstream of a cutoff low centered around the 
Outer Banks of NC. Areas of rainfall associated with midlevel 
frontogenesis are located from the southern New England coast to
Long Island. Some holes in the precip shield are developing, 
and elevated echoes are not reaching the ground on the outer 
edges of the shield. This is due to plentiful dry air at mid and
low levels sampled on the 12Z KALY (and to a lesser extent, 
KOKX) sounding. PoPs increase gradually from SE to NW as the dry
air is gradually eroded, but the majority of the rest of the 
day will be dry for most of the CWA. Likely PoPs reach southern 
Litchfield/Dutchess by 00Z Mon.

&&

.SHORT TERM /TONIGHT THROUGH TUESDAY NIGHT/... 
Overrunning showers continue overnight with guidance still 
suggesting that the most widespread and steadiest showers stay 
just to our east in New England closer to the moisture plume 
where PWATs exceed 1.5". However, depending on how far inland 
the coastal low tracks up the eastern seaboard tonight, there 
could be some enhanced FGEN in the 850 - 700hPa layer that 
supports some bands of more organized showers as far west as the
Hudson River. The GFS and its ensembles as well as the NAM and 
even the ECWMF hint at this possibility while the CMC remains 
the driest solution. To account for bands of showers potentially
developing and producing periods of steadier rain, we extended 
the likely POPs westward to cover most of the Hudson Valley with
likely POPs in western New England. We trended POPs downwards 
farther north/west with just slight chance for the western 
Mohawk Valley and southern Adirondacks. Guidance still suggests 
that some elevated instability within the main moisture plume 
could support some thunderstorm development but this plume still
looks displaced just to our east. Latest SPC Day 1 Convective 
Outlook also shows this. Overall QPF amounts tonight are 
expected to be rather low at only 0.25 - 0.50" in western New 
England with amounts trending lowering north and westward with 
just 0.10" - 0.25" for the Greater Capital District and 
Taconics. Should enhanced FGEN in the mid-levels support bands 
of steadier rain, isolated higher amounts are possible.

Otherwise, temperatures tonight will be mild with lows only 
dropping into the upper 40s to low 50s due to clouds and 
showers.

While the upper level wave opens up and weakens heading into
Monday, the trough now looks like it will linger over the 
Northeast for much of the day. With low-level moisture staying 
trapped underneath the inversion and weak overrunning 
continuing, we maintained slight chance POPs from the Hudson 
River eastward in NY with chance POPs in western New England to 
account for lingering light showers or even drizzle. Since 
guidance slowed down the progression of the trough, we painted a
more pessimistic picture for Monday with cloudier skies and 
weak northerly winds keeping temperatures somewhat cooler with 
highs only rising into the upper 50s to near 60 in the valley. 
Any partial sun now looks limited to the western Mohawk Valley 
and western Adirondacks which could allow these areas to be the
warmest spots rising into the mid 60s.

Any breaks in the sky coverage likely fill back in by Mon night
with overcast skies expected. This will keep temperatures mild 
once again. Weak overrunning continues which would support 
drizzle or light showers, especially from the Capital District 
south and east.

Onshore flow continues into Tuesday as the upper level trough
gradually diminishes overhead but high pressure anchored off 
the Canadian Maritimes retrogrades inland. While we show warmer
high temperatures compared to Monday rising into the low to mid
60s, the southeast flow combined with mostly cloudy skies and 
some lingering patchy drizzle all could trend temperatures 
downward in future updates. 

Cloudy skies once again will at least make for a mild Tues night
with overnight lows only dropping into the mid to upper 50s.
Patchy drizzle could continue so maintained slight chance POPs.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH SATURDAY/...
Upper impulse tracks northwest of our region in southwest upper flow 
Wednesday, departing Wednesday night and Thursday morning. The 
associated cold front is expected to weaken as it tracks through and 
the associated low level forcing will be weakening as well. So, 
there will be considerable moisture associated with the system but 
with the upper dynamics tracking well north and west and the weak 
low level forcing, suggesting scattered showers Wednesday and 
Wednesday night. Highs Wednesday in the mid to upper 60s with near 
70 in some parts of the Hudson Valley and lower 60s higher terrain.

Drying and clearing trend Thursday with highs in the mid to upper 
60s and mid 50s to around 60 higher terrain. Continued dry Friday 
but there could be some increase in clouds through the day. Highs 
Friday in the upper 50s to lower 60s with lower to mid 50s higher 
terrain.

There are considerable differences in sources of guidance/ensembles 
in the Friday night through Saturday time frame. Some guidance 
suggests dry weather with flat upper ridging and other guidance 
suggests upper energy and deep moisture tracking into our region 
with chances for rain. Will indicate more clouds than sun and 
scattered showers Saturday but lots of uncertainty and we have lots 
of time to watch the evolution. Highs Saturday in the mid 50s to 
near 60 with lower 50s higher terrain.

&&

.AVIATION /18Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Through 18z/Mon...VFR conditions will start the period with just 
some high clouds around. Ceilings will lower tonight into Monday as 
a coastal low drifts northward. Showers should begin from south to 
north later this afternoon through this evening, though will have to 
battle some dry air before precipitation reaches the ground, so 
timing of precip is a bit uncertain. Will begin with VCSH wording, 
then transition to shower wording a few hours afterward. Showers 
will also be intermittent so there will be some periods of dry 
weather between showers. Precipitation will be light to start so not 
expecting much in the way of reduced vsbys. Ceilings should trend 
down to low end VFR then to MVFR tonight. Some IFR ceilings cannot 
be ruled out late tonight into Monday morning. Higher confidence for 
this is at KPOU/KPSF. A few showers are expected to linger for much 
of Monday as well. Some drizzle is possible as well. Ceilings will 
struggle to lift much if at all on Monday (remaining IFR/MVFR).

Wind will be mainly north to northeasterly at 3-6 kt through Monday.

Outlook...

Monday Night: Low Operational Impact. Slight Chance of SHRA.
Tuesday: Low Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.
Tuesday Night: Low Operational Impact. Slight Chance of SHRA.
Wednesday: Moderate Operational Impact. Scattered SHRA.
Wednesday Night: Moderate Operational Impact. Scattered SHRA.
Thursday: Low Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.
Thursday Night: No Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.
Friday: No Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.

&&

.ALY WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CT...None.
NY...None.
MA...None.
VT...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Speciale
NEAR TERM...Thompson
SHORT TERM...Speciale
LONG TERM...NAS
AVIATION...Rathbun
