FXUS63 KIWX 231725
AFDIWX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Northern Indiana
125 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Issued at 328 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

There is a low chance of light rain west of Interstate 69 
tonight. Otherwise dry and warm conditions persist through Monday 
with highs in the mid to upper 70s. A better chance for widespread
rain arrives late Tuesday into early Wednesday. Dry conditions 
and more seasonable temperatures return thereafter.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today and Tonight)
Issued at 328 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Weak and disjointed shortwave currently just upstream on 
satellite imagery will lift NE through our area today. A stray 
sprinkle is not entirely out of the question in our far west but 
degree of dry air as noted on 00Z KILN and KILX soundings is 
formidable and weak CVA will likely prove insufficient in 
generating anything more than some increased mid/upper level 
clouds. Will actually still see a fair amount of sun by the 
afternoon with 850mb temps 10-12C. This should allow for another 
day in the mid/upper 70s. A stray 80 may be possible again but 
will hold just shy with highs very similar to yesterday and 
inherited forecast. Surface dewpoints will also be very similar 
today with afternoon minimum RH's again near 30-35 percent in SE 
zones (40-45 northwest). Winds will be similar to yesterday in the
east with peak gusts around 25mph. However, gradient tightens in 
our W/NW by this afternoon with decent mixing depths noted on 
forecast soundings. Some gusts around 35mph are anticipated there.
This yields another day with some marginal fire wx concerns given
dry fine fuels but mismatch between greatest wind and lowest RH 
should prevent a more substantial threat.

Better chance for rain arrives in our W/NW tonight. Another weak 
vort max will eject out of western CONUS trough with a more 
formidable low level theta-e surge. Still a lot of dry/stable air 
to overcome though and best moisture convergence will remain NW of
our CWA on nose of 50+ kt LLJ lifting through Iowa and Wisconsin.
300- 305K isentropic ascent is modest in our area but worth a low
chance mention in our NW zones. Any precip amounts will be very 
light...a few hundredths at best. Overnight lows will be very 
mild, particularly in the W/NW where temps may not drop much below
60F. Mid 50s more likely in east with lighter winds and less 
clouds.

&&

.LONG TERM...(Monday through Saturday)
Issued at 328 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Monday will remain dry as we await the arrival of lifting upper 
low and associated frontal zone. Strong southerly flow remains in 
place though thermal advections are relatively neutral. Increased 
cloud cover will likely shave a degree or two off afternoon highs 
compared to today but mid 70s still likely.

00Z NWP suite is in better agreement for midweek system but still
some disagreements regarding exact timing and track. 00Z NAM is 
on western edge of most guidance. GEFS ensemble mean is slightly 
faster than deterministic GFS but close in terms of track and 
similar to the ECMWF. GEFS ensemble members still show a fair 
amount of spread though. The primary area of uncertainty due to 
this spread will be total precip amounts. A healthy 
deformation/fgen band is expected to setup somewhere over the area
but exact placement, timing, and strength are still uncertain and
will have a big impact on total rain amounts. Best chances for 
this heavier rain will be late Tue into early Wed. Confident 
everyone will see at least some rain and have therefore increased 
PoP's further but exact amounts unclear and held close to 
concensus. It should be noted though that even the high-end rain 
amounts around 2" are unlikely to cause any impacts given recent 
dry conditions. Dry weather and seasonable temps will likely 
return for the rest of the period. NBM does spread some low PoP's 
over the area for the weekend given some ensemble members are 
quicker with next upper low. Prefer the deterministic runs though 
that maintain dry conditions until at least late Sunday.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 111 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions to prevail despite yet another weak disturbance
moving in tonight to possibly bring a sprinkle or light shower to
KSBN. Gusty nature of winds will diminish quickly around sunset
with threat for LLWS returning, especially at KSBN closer to the
strengthening LLJ. Once mixing commences Mon AM threat will end
with some gusts around 20 kts expected again. 

&&

.IWX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IN...NONE.
MI...NONE.
OH...NONE.
LM...Small Craft Advisory until 8 AM EDT Monday for LMZ043-046.

&&

$$

SYNOPSIS...AGD
SHORT TERM...AGD
LONG TERM...AGD
AVIATION...Fisher


Visit us at www.weather.gov/iwx

Follow us on Facebook...Twitter...and YouTube at:
www.facebook.com/NWSNorthernIndiana
www.twitter.com/nwsiwx
www.youtube.com/NWSNorthernIndiana
