FXUS63 KIND 231837
AFDIND

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Indianapolis IN
237 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.Short Term...(This evening through Monday)
Issued at 237 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

* Warm and Dry Weather Continues Through Monday
* Elevated Risk for Fire Danger Monday Afternoon

Indian Summer in full swing across the region this afternoon with 
another outstanding late October day. The clouds associated with an 
upper wave lifting through the region earlier this morning have 
moved well north of the region. As ridging aloft has 
reestablished...skies are mostly sunny with gusty southerly winds 
again warming temperatures well into the mid and upper 70s this 
afternoon.

A skinny ridge will amplify over the Ohio Valley into tonight in 
between an upper low weakening over the Mid Atlantic and the broad 
trough across the Northern Rockies. This will remain the primary 
feature aloft over the region into Monday shifting slowly east as an 
upper low dives into the Southern Plains and helps kick the western 
trough east.

With the expanding ridge this afternoon and the breezy southerly 
flow...area of subsidence and drier air steadily advecting north 
from the Tennessee Valley. Expect dewpoints to fall back a 
bit...perhaps as low as the mid and upper 40s into this evening as a 
result. To this point...fire concerns have been minimal as RH values 
have largely remained above 40% and may only drop a bit more over 
the next few hours as the drier air arrives from the south. An area 
of mid level clouds lifting out of Missouri and western Illinois 
will drift across the Wabash Valley tonight and may bring a brief 
increase in cloud cover into the early overnight before mainly clear 
skies return. Gusts will drop off this evening but expect winds to 
hold at 5-10mph from the SE for most of the night as the pressure 
gradient at the surface gradually tightens. 

Monday will be similar to today as the presence of the nearby ridge 
aloft will maintain mostly sunny and warm conditions into the 
afternoon. Model soundings show a well mixed boundary layer yet 
again by early afternoon with a tight surface gradient lingering... 
supportive of another afternoon with breezy southerly flow. Of 
greater concern is the potential for a resumption of elevated fire 
danger conditions Monday as the combination of drier air aloft and 
the lingering near surface dry layer will likely enable lower 
dewpoints than the model guidance is offering...similar to what 
happened late last week. With a deeper surge of moisture and greater 
high level cloud coverage ahead of the approaching storm system 
holding off until late day in western counties...have nudged down 
dewpoints several degrees for most of the day. RH values are progged 
as low as 25-35% by the afternoon over the southeast counties and in 
combination with the gusty winds and dry ground will offer a greater 
albeit non-critical risk for fire danger Monday. Could see an SPS 
being needed to address concerns and will pass this on to the 
overnight forecast shift.

Temps...a lack of decoupling in the boundary layer overnight will 
keep temps warm with lows holding in the mid and upper 50s. Low 
level thermals support highs similar to today for Monday in the mid 
and upper 70s. Temps in the west may end up a degree or two cooler 
as the high clouds arrive late day.

&&

.Long Term...(Monday night through Sunday)
Issued at 237 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

* Potential for heaviest rainfall event in over a month on Tuesday

* Late week cool down back to near normal temperatures in the 60s 

.Synopsis...

Upper low develops at the base of a deep trough over the Southern 
Plains then ejects northeast through the Wabash Valley Wednesday 
while a surface reflection takes a similar track through the region. 
Weak ridging builds in aloft through next weekend while an upper low 
traverses the southern tier states. Surface high pressure over the 
Upper Great Lakes will be the dominate weather influencer late week 
into the weekend with the potential for some effects from the 
southern low by the weekend. 

.Monday Night into Wednesday...

Best chance for widespread rainfall comes Tuesday afternoon into 
Tuesday night as the next weather system approaches from the 
southwest. Moisture advection ramps up beginning Monday night as the 
upper ridge axis pushes east and the low level jet sets up right on 
top of the region. Forecast soundings show ample dry air entrainment 
and a subsidence inversion aloft ahead of the system Monday, so 
expect the full column to take a while to saturate from the top down 
even as moisture transport northward increases. High clouds at the 
beginning of the period will overspread the region and then lower 
through the day on Tuesday as saturation occurs aloft. The big 
question is how well are models handling the dry air? Over the past 
month, guidance has had quite the moist bias leading to well 
overdone QPF, even in the short term. With a deep dry air layer on 
Forecast soundings Tuesday, expect a similar situation to take 
place. NBM 50 percentile for QPF has 0.60 to 0.90 inches for 24 hour 
rainfall amounts with the 25th percentile QPF about half that. GFS 
and EC ensemble box and whiskey plots for QPF show a consensus 
around 0.5 to 1.00 inch 24 hour rainfall totals; however will likely 
trend on the lower end of the guidance due to the wet bias as of 
late. 

There are a few factors though in support of heavier rainfall across 
the region with this set up. The area of low pressure developing in 
the southern plains ejects northeast tracking right through 
Central/Northern Indiana Tuesday evening through Wednesday morning. 
Ample lift and forcing from the nearly vertically stacked low should 
be enough to overcome dry air and lead to widespread precipitation. 
Both NAEFS and ECE ESAT tables show PW approaching 1.50 inches, 
about 2 to 3 standard deviations above climatological norms for this 
time of year. IVT values of 750 kg m/s indicate healthy moisture 
transport northward ahead of the system, which will lead saturation 
through the column. 

While confidence is high for rainfall, lower confidence exists 
regarding timing of the rainfall onset and amounts due to the 
previously mentioned model wet bias and a deep dry air layer on 
forecast soundings. Guidance has pushed back the arrival of rain a 
few hours, arriving during the late afternoon/ evening hours rather 
than earlier in the day. Precipitation will likely begin as virga 
Tuesday afternoon which will work to saturate the atmosphere. The 
longer it takes rain to reach the ground, the less rainfall amounts 
will be.

High pressure builds into the Northern Plains while low pressure 
departs to the northeast resulting in northerly wind and cold air 
advection Wednesday. Clouds may linger through the first half of 
Wednesday but a drying trend is expected through the rest of the day 
as drier air filters in aloft. Low level moisture will likely be the 
last to get scoured out so the potential is there for lower ceilings 
lingering through Wednesday morning. 

While there isn't a strong cold push behind this system, a cooler 
airmass closer to climatological norms moves in on Wednesday with 
850 mb temps dropping from +12C to +5C, supporting highs in the 
upper 50s to lower 60s. 

.Thursday through Next Weekend...

Mid range guidance shows weak ridging building into the region 
latter half of the week with an surface high setting up over the 
Upper Great Lakes region. Slight warming trend through the weekend 
however, easterly flow aloft and NE surface winds is not conducive 
for bringing warm air into the region. This pattern likely supports 
drier weather for the region with highs closer to normal in the 
lower 60s with 850mb temps rising to around +8C by the weekend.  

Uncertainty builds into the weekend as another trough ejects 
eastward across the southern tier states under the northern ridge. 
Both EC and GFS ensembles keep the southern system shunted well to 
the south as high pressure across the north becomes the dominate 
synoptic feature in the region. EC deterministic and ensemble runs 
have been a bit further north than the GFS, but have trended south 
in recent runs increasing confidence in a drier forecast. Ensemble 
and NBM QPF probabilities keep the best chances for rainfall greater 
than 0.10 inches well to the south, with many members showing no 
QPF for Central Indiana. Will keep an eye on the next weekend system 
as things can change between now and then, especially since the 
energy for this system won't approach the West Coast and get sampled 
until Wednesday. For now keeping PoPs generally low across the whole 
region into the weekend at slight chance to chance. A low track like 
this well to the south is a more wintertime pattern, so guidance may 
not handle it well over the next few days with potentially storm 
tracks likely waffling back north and south until a good sampling of 
the energy occurs midweek.

&&

.Aviation...(18Z TAF Issuance)
Issued at 1258 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Impacts:

* Southerly wind gusts up to 25kts through early evening...then 
  again at 20-25kts by late Monday morning

* Non-convective low level wind shear possible at KLAF and KHUF 
  overnight and early Monday

Discussion: 

High clouds have diminished early this afternoon as ridging aloft 
reestablishes. Expect mainly clear skies for the rest of the 
afternoon with the possibility for a subtle increase in mid and high 
level clouds at KHUF and KLAF late day into tonight. Some cirrus 
will linger across the region into Monday with southerly winds once 
again gusting to 20-25kts late morning into the afternoon as 
boundary layer mixing maximizes.

With stronger 850mb flow just west of the region...non-convective 
low level wind shear will develop from late evening through daybreak 
Monday at KLAF and KHUF.


&&

.IND WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

Short Term...Ryan
Long Term...CM
Aviation...Ryan
