FXUS63 KIND 231659
AFDIND

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Indianapolis IN
1259 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Updated Aviation Discussion...

.Forecast Update...
Issued at 938 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Mid level clouds continue to lift northeast across the region this 
morning in tandem with a subtle wave aloft. The bulk of the clouds 
are already shifting northeast of the forecast area as of 1330Z. 
Temperatures are starting out milder than recent mornings...with 
upper 50s to mid 60s already common across central Indiana.

The forecast is in great shape for the rest of the day with more 
Indian Summer on the docket for the area. As the upper wave lifts 
north into the Great Lakes...ridging aloft will reestablish this 
afternoon with increasing sunshine across the forecast area. Mid and 
high level clouds will begin to drift into the area from the 
southwest by late afternoon but overall sunshine will be plentiful 
today. 

Once again...the winds will be a primary focus as model soundings 
suggest deeper mixing up to about 800mb on the table for the 
afternoon. So far this morning...gustier S/SE winds have been 
focused across western Indiana and into Illinois where a tighter 
surface pressure gradient exists and in the vicinity of stronger 
850mb flow. As the mixing level rises though...expect gusts to 20-
30mph to expand east across much of the forecast area into the 
afternoon. Dewpoints will likely remain in the low to mid 50s into 
the afternoon before the combination of drier near surface air 
advecting north from the Tennessee Valley and drier air aloft mixed 
down pull dewpoints back into the 40s with RH levels expected to 
bottom out in many locations at 30-40% this afternoon. This is 
likely to preclude any fire concerns but as has been the case the 
last few days...will need to monitor closely as any subtle downward 
shift in RH levels later today could briefly introduce a more 
favorable setup for fire weather.

Highs this afternoon will warm into the upper 70s in most areas. 
Zone and grid updates out.

&&

.Short Term...(Today and tonight)
Issued at 300 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

- Continued dry and breezy with well above normal temperatures

A moisture starved upper trough was seen on H20 vapor imagery 
pivoting northeast across the middle Mississippi Valley. With BUFKIT 
continuing to show and very dry column below 25K feet, the synoptic 
forcing has only been able to generate patches of cirrus over the 
Mississippi, Ohio and Tennessee Valleys. This feature will lift 
northeast across central Indiana overnight and into Sunday morning. 
After that, a quick upper ridge will follow and allow for decreasing 
cirrus from southwest to northeast for a time, but then thickening 
cirrus and some mid level clouds will move in again from the west 
this afternoon and tonight, buoyed by ejecting impulses in the fast 
southwest flow ahead of a Four Corners system and 305K isentropic 
lift. NBM produced some low PoPs over our NW tonight, but believe 
and rain will be falling into such a dry layer that it would only 
result in virga.  

Tight surface low pressure gradient, in between the east coast high 
and Plains/Rockies low pressure system, and mixing down of the 
eastern reaches of Middle Mississippi Valley wind max will once 
again result in southerly winds gusting to 25 knots or more, 
especially over areas near and west of Interstate 69. That said with 
MinRH 35% and greater even using the more reliable of late HRRR, 
which has a better grasp of mixing down of lower dew points, red 
flag headlines are not needed. There could be a very brief window 
during the middle and late afternoon, where the lowest dew points 
get mixed down from a max mixing height of 5K feet and present near 
elevated fire danger but not enough to put in HWO or SPS. 

The breezy southerly winds and afternoon sunshine will again allow 
for well above normal temperatures with highs in the upper 70s to 
possibly lower 80s over some locales. 

With the increasing cirrus after the ridge moves to the east and 
continued southerly winds, temperatures will only be able to drop as 
low as the middle and upper 50s overnight tonight.

&&

.Long Term...(Monday through Saturday)
Issued at 300 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

* One more day of seasonably warm and dry weather

* Rainfall chances increasing for Tuesday and Wednesday

* Drier, cooler air returns for the end of next week

Monday:

Early on Monday, a positively tilted trough will stretch from New 
Mexico into the Dakotas. Forecast guidance continues to indicate 
that this trough will become piecewise in nature, splitting into 
separate northern and southern features. The northernmost 
disturbance should quickly race off into Canada by Monday evening. 
Ahead of this trough, southerly surface winds continue for one more 
day, with a tight pressure gradient allowing the speed of said winds 
to remain near 15 knots in some areas. Diurnal mixing processes 
should increase gustiness on Monday afternoon, bringing drier air 
down to the surface as well. A possible shift to a more 
southeasterly wind direction should relegate moisture advection to 
meager amounts, and thus the best parameters for precipitation 
chances with this first system remain displaced to the Northwest of 
the forecast area. 

This lack of rainfall and the aforementioned afternoon mixing 
prompts the mention of potentially elevated fire weather conditions 
yet again on Monday afternoon, especially due to the presence of a 
few hot spots on satellite imagery this weekend. While surface fuels 
remain very dry, RH values should be slightly higher than previous 
days, and crossing critical fire weather thresholds appears unlikely 
at this time. Further up in the atmosphere, moisture advection is 
expected to be more potent ahead of the Canadian disturbance. As a 
result, the development of high clouds Monday is likely, keeping 
afternoon highs slightly below Sunday's values. Likewise, overnight 
lows on Monday will be relegated to the upper 50s by breezy winds 
and this cloud deck.

Tuesday into Wednesday:

The second piece of the parent trough stalls out over the southern 
Great Plains at the beginning of the forecast period. By Tuesday 
afternoon, it will have both deepened and developed a negative tilt, 
a classic sign of a more active weather pattern approaching the 
area. Confidence has increased in a more northwesterly track of this 
disturbance, with both the Euro and the GFS corroborating this 
trend. Questions linger regarding the supporting jet dynamics and 
the intensity of this system. The answers to said questions lie 
within the mesoscale features that come into the picture as the time 
of the event approaches. However, confidence is high that Tuesday 
and Wednesday will see increased precipitation chances and higher 
levels of cloud coverage than the rest of the forecast. 

As such, PoPs and Sky coverage values have increased for these two 
days as this disturbance moves in the vicinity of Indiana. PWATS 
should peak near 1.5 inches overnight on Tuesday and remain elevated 
above 1 inch throughout most of the day on Wednesday, indicating the 
potential for measurable rainfall across the area on both days. 
Thunder chances appear minimal at this time, but the proximity of 
this low should provide enhanced shear parameters. Instability 
parameters, on the other hand, remain questionable throughout 
various model guidance, and severe weather currently appears 
unlikely at this time. With this being said, this system should 
provide highly beneficial rainfall across the Indianapolis CWA in 
the middle part of next week. 

Through the Rest of the Forecast Period:

After this second disturbance ejects to the Northeast overnight 
Wednesday, its associated cold frontal passage will bring cooler and 
drier air down into the Wabash Valley. The coldest temps in this 
forecast will happen Thursday morning, with minimum temperatures 
forecast to be in the low 40s then. Ridging generally builds back 
into the area behind these early week disturbances, allowing warm 
air advection to slowly crank back up. Maximum temperatures should 
correspondingly rise into the 60s for the rest of the work week, 
with conditions remaining dry as well. 

The exception to this drying trend is the presence of chance PoPs in 
the forecast next weekend, prompted by modeled indicators of 
moisture return in the face of yet another approaching trough from 
the west. The finer scale details of this trough are yet to be 
hammered out within the forecast guidance, leaving confidence low in 
specific impacts to Indiana at this time. Stay tuned to future 
forecast updates as models eventually come to a greater consensus on 
the exact track and intensity of this feature. In general, 
anticipate classic fall weather for the end of next week, with 
chances for more beneficial rainfall entering the forecast again by 
the weekend.

&&

.Aviation...(18Z TAF Issuance)
Issued at 1258 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Impacts:

* Southerly wind gusts up to 25kts through early evening...then 
  again at 20-25kts by late Monday morning

* Non-convective low level wind shear possible at KLAF and KHUF 
  overnight and early Monday

Discussion: 

High clouds have diminished early this afternoon as ridging aloft 
reestablishes. Expect mainly clear skies for the rest of the 
afternoon with the possibility for a subtle increase in mid and high 
level clouds at KHUF and KLAF late day into tonight. Some cirrus 
will linger across the region into Monday with southerly winds once 
again gusting to 20-25kts late morning into the afternoon as 
boundary layer mixing maximizes.

With stronger 850mb flow just west of the region...non-convective 
low level wind shear will develop from late evening through daybreak 
Monday at KLAF and KHUF.

&&

.IND WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...None. 

&&

$$

Update...Ryan
Short Term...MK
Long Term...Marcus
Aviation...Ryan
