AEUS74 KMRX 231936
AQIMRX

Air Quality Index Forecast
National Weather Service Morristown TN
336 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

This forecast is produced by the Tennessee Department Of Environment
And Conservation (http://www.state.tn.us/environment/).

Air Quality Forecast For Monday Oct 24 2022


                                     LEVEL OF
STATION              COLOR        HEALTH CONCERN         POLLUTANT

Tri-Cities TN        Yellow          Moderate               PM

Knoxville TN         Yellow          Moderate               PM

GSMNP                Yellow          Moderate               PM

Chattanooga TN       Yellow          Moderate               PM


PM = Particulate Matter

OZ = Ozone


The six levels of health concern:

Good (Green):  Air quality is considered satisfactory, and air pollution
               poses little or no risk.

Moderate (Yellow): Air quality is acceptable, however, for some pollutants
               there may be a moderate health concern for a very small
               number of people. For example, people who are unusually
               sensitive to ozone may experience respiratory symptoms.

Unhealthy For Sensitive Groups (Orange): Members of sensitive groups may
               experience health effects. This means they are likely
               to be affected at lower levels than the general public.
               For example, people with lung disease are at greater risk
               from exposure to ozone, while people with either lung
               disease or heart disease are at greater risk from exposure
               to particle pollution. The general public is not likely to
               be affected when the AQI is in this range.

Unhealthy (Red): Members of sensitive groups may experience more serious
                 health effects.

Very Unhealthy (Purple): Everyone may experience more serious health effects.

Hazardous (Maroon): The entire population is more likely to be affected.


For more information, visit the EPA AIRNOW web site at:
http://www.airnow.gov

$$
