FXUS64 KMRX 231741
AFDMRX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Morristown TN
141 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New AVIATION...

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1041 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Forecast on track this morning with no updates needed. Made slight
adjustments to hourly temps and dewpoints to match up with latest
obs.

&&

.SHORT TERM...
(Today and tonight)
Issued at 355 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Messages:

1. Temperatures a few degrees above normal today.

2. Afternoon relative humidities still rather low in the upper 20s
to 35 percent Today. 

Discussion:

High level cloudiness still over the northeast half of the
forecast area early this Sunday morning with a shortwave moving
through. At the surface, temperatures are in the mid 40s to lower
50s with dewpoint temperatures in the mid 30s to mid 40s. Winds
are light as high pressure lies just to the east of the Appalachians
and some upper level ridging over the forecast area. Another 
mostly sunny day as the ridging holds and builds a little stronger
into tonight. High temperatures will be similar to Saturday 
mostly lower to mid 70s again today. Due to the dry ground and 
light winds will go with persistence and forecast minimum 
relative humidities to again be between about 25 and 35 percent. 
Tonight with ridging aloft and at the surface holding strong lows 
will be mostly in the 40s.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Monday through Saturday)
Issued at 355 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Messages:

1. Possible advisory level mountain wave event Tue and Tue night 
ahead of incoming upper low.

2. Rainfall amounts uncertain for Tue evening/Tue night.

Discussion:

Upper ridging will extend from the central Gulf coast, northward 
into the Tennessee and southern portions of the Ohio river valleys 
early Monday, with troughing over the Rockies. A shortwave embedded 
in the southern extent of this trough will form a cutoff low over 
New Mexico and western Texas late Monday night, shifting east 
through Arkansas during the day Tuesday before lifting northeastward 
into the Ohio valley Tuesday night into Wednesday.

Upper ridging and continued southerly flow into the forecast area 
will keep conditions dry and warm on Monday and likely into Tuesday 
as well. Despite southerly flow, moisture will be limited as the 
upper low approaches TN from the west. Guidance only brings PWATs up 
to around a meager 1.5" in the south Tue evening into Tue night 
(much less in NE TN and SW VA). Most deterministic guidance 
indicates there will be some sort of MCS activity moving east 
through TN Tue evening into Tue night, but also show it weakening as 
it moves into eastern TN. Forecast soundings don't give much hope or 
support for ongoing thunder as rain moves in Tue evening/night so 
just have showers in the forecast. Wouldn't be surprised if there's 
a few lightning strikes/rumbles of thunder but am not impressed with 
the chances for thunder at the moment. Likewise, think the rainfall 
amounts may wind up lacking as well. Downslope flow (more on that in 
a second) will likely reduce rainfall amounts in the northeast to 
negligible values. Even in the south, between the weakening 
convection and the differences in forecast QPF, would expect even 
the high end amounts to be less than 0.75" and possibly considerably 
less.

Going back to the downslope flow, vertically stacked upper low 
lifting northeast through TN and the Ohio valley will place the CWA 
in favorable south to southeast H85 flow for downslope flow off the 
Appalchians and into the Tennessee valley. Winds at the H85 level 
appear supportive of advisory level winds at the moment and not so 
much for high wind warnings, though it's still a few days off and 
too far out for headlines anyways. Do think this will aid in warm 
temperatures on Tue however, and have areas in immediately in the 
lee of the mountains in the upper 70s for highs that afternoon.

Rain clears out by midday Wednesday, with the rain and cloud cover 
knocking highs down to perhaps a couple of degrees below normal. 
Upper ridging then moves in for dry conditions and a slight warming 
trend to round out the week. Rain chances increase heading back into 
the weekend as another upper trough cuts off over Texas on Friday 
and slowly shifts east into the weekend.

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 137 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Quiet TAF period with VFR conditions expected at all sites. Winds
will mostly remain light and variable. A little bit of river/lake
fog possible again overnight but not enough confidence to include
in any of the TAF sites.

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Chattanooga Airport, TN             48  77  55  76 /   0   0   0  40 
Knoxville McGhee Tyson Airport, TN  47  76  50  78 /   0   0   0  20 
Oak Ridge, TN                       46  75  50  77 /   0   0   0  30 
Tri Cities Airport, TN              41  74  46  76 /   0   0   0   0 

&&

.MRX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NC...NONE.
TN...NONE.
VA...NONE.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...SR
LONG TERM....CD
AVIATION...SR
