FXUS64 KMEG 231743 AAA
AFDMEG

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Memphis TN
1243 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New AVIATION...

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1033 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

No major changes were made to the forecast in the short term. 
Forecast is on track with temperatures climbing to around 80 
degrees areawide this afternoon with gusty south winds. Winds 
will initially be near advisory criteria along and west of the 
Mississippi River, but are forecast to weaken slightly as we 
progress throughout the day.

New zones are now available. 

AC3

&&

.DISCUSSION...
(Today through Saturday)
Issued at 323 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The WPC MSLP prognosis for 18Z this afternoon shows a 1023mb high
over the Carolinas juxtaposed with a 985mb low over the northern 
Plains. The 5mb+ pressure gradient across the Mid-South will 
linger through at least Monday night, leading to a few blustery 
days. Southerly gradient winds of 15-20mph with intermittent gusts
of up to 30mph are expected, especially from the Mississippi 
Delta up through Crowley's Ridge. Blended in the NBM 90th 
percentile to account for these elevated gradient winds for the 
next few days. Temperatures remain slightly above normal with 
gradually increasing humidity through tomorrow thanks to this 
southerly flow. 

Guidance for Tuesday's system is starting to come together, 
suggesting an area over central Mississippi with decent synoptic 
lift and ample bulk shear. Instability still looks lacking; ensemble 
probabilities of CAPE > 500 J/kg in our CWA are still maxing out 
around 20%. However, this kind of cool season setup does not require 
much instability to tap into the favorable kinematics and sheared 
environment. The current convective outlook encompassing the 
southern portion of our CWA reflects the potential of what storms 
could do if they are able to fire up in the first place on
Tuesday.

After Tuesday night's FROPA, temperatures take a brief dive below 
normal. We likely won't see any temperatures above 70 degrees on 
Wednesday with the cold, dry airmass building in behind the 
front. By the weekend, we'll see rain chances increase again with 
another progressive low pressure system. Deterministic guidance 
is still quite split on the location of this system, with the 
ECMWF & Canadian models suggesting a more northern position and 
the GFS placing it down toward the Gulf Coast. The NBM still looks
too early with the timing of this second FROPA, but the best 
chance for more substantial rain is most likely on Saturday. 

CAD

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 1235 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A persistence forecast over the next 30 hours. Low level pressure
will remain relatively tight through the period. Overnight winds
will lose some gust potential, but not decouple completely. FL020
winds tonight will be slightly weaker this evening, with LLWS 
mention thresholds likely met only at JBR.

Expect strong south-southwesterly low level winds to continue 
through the Monday evening MEM arrival push - likely accompanied
by -SHRA near the western TRACON. 

PWB

&&

.MEG WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AR...None.
MO...None.
MS...None.
TN...None.
&&

$$

PUBLIC FORECAST...AC3
AVIATION...PWB
