FXUS64 KMRX 231914
AFDMRX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Morristown TN
314 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New SHORT TERM, LONG TERM...

.SHORT TERM...
(This evening through Monday)
Issued at 305 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022


Key Message:

1. Low RH tomorrow afternoon with values ranging from the low to mid 
30s.


Discussion:

Overall, a quiet forecast period ahead with not much to talk about. 
Patchy fog was observed early this morning along a few of the area 
waterways. With similar winds/temps/dewpoints expected overnight, 
patchy fog once again possible. 

Tomorrow, high pressure remains in control as we await our incoming 
trough just beyond the short term period. Highs will be similar 
tomorrow to what they were today with highs in the low to mid 70s, 
which is around 5 to 8 degrees above normal. The main focus for 
tomorrow will be the low afternoon RH with values ranging from the 
low to mid 30s. Winds remain light and variable through the period 
due to the high pressure centered over our area.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Monday night through next Sunday)
Issued at 305 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Messages:

1. Increasing winds and gusty conditions Tuesday afternoon into 
Wednesday morning, with a focus in the higher elevations of the East 
Tennessee mountains and Cumberland Plateau. Wind advisory criteria 
may be met. 

2. Increasing precipitation chances late Tuesday into Wednesday 
morning as well. Best chance for rain showers exists along and west 
of I-75. 

Discussion:

The long term period will begin Monday night with sharp ridging 
extending from the central Gulf of Mexico northward into the eastern 
Great Lakes region. Upstream, a mid/upper level trough will be 
digging into the southern plains. This amplified synoptic pattern 
will result in continued above normal temperatures Tuesday. 
Shortwave energy will kick vertically stacked low pressure towards 
the region late Tuesday. With the disturbance will come increasing 
850mb flow from the south and an approaching front from the west. 
These two features will be the primary area of focus for the early 
extended forecast.

As mentioned above, guidance continues to show increasing 850mb flow 
out of the south at generally 40+ kts over the East Tennessee 
mountains and 50+ kts over the the Cumberland Plateau. This will 
likely result in increasing winds/gusty conditions in the higher 
elevation locations. The timeframe looks to be Tuesday afternoon 
into the early Wednesday morning. Current thoughts are that this is 
trending towards low end advisory criteria with gusts upwards of 
40kts. Mountain wave activity could lead to some locally stronger 
gusts and thus, a wind advisory may be need later down the line. 

The chance for precip will also be on the increase as the surface 
boundary approaches from the west. The good news is that given the 
late evening/overnight arrival of showers, the activity will be 
moving into very little to no instability and should keep the threat 
of any stronger activity null. In fact, thunder may even be quite 
sparse itself, with the southern Plateau being the most likely 
location to observe a few rumbles. The bad news is that rainfall 
totals are not looking like they will provide much relief to on 
going drought conditions. PWAT values are typically around 1.2"-1.3" 
and most recent NAM runs have trended back on 12 hour accumulation 
totals, with values struggling to even reach half an inch. Most 
recent GEFS mean run suggest even lower values. Additionally, with 
downslope drying across far NE TN and SW VA, accumulation totals of 
only a few hundredths or less are expected. 

As the rain trends downwards Wednesday morning the synoptic pattern 
will briefly deamplify with cooler conditions gradually warming into 
the weekend. Additional rain chances for the weekend associated with 
another trough shifting east across the southern plains, however, 
with model discrepancies this far out have kept PoPs restricted to 
chance.

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 137 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Quiet TAF period with VFR conditions expected at all sites. Winds
will mostly remain light and variable. A little bit of river/lake
fog possible again overnight but not enough confidence to include
in any of the TAF sites.

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
Chattanooga Airport, TN             47  76  54  76 /   0   0   0  40 
Knoxville McGhee Tyson Airport, TN  45  76  48  78 /   0   0   0  10 
Oak Ridge, TN                       43  75  48  77 /   0   0   0  10 
Tri Cities Airport, TN              40  74  45  76 /   0   0   0   0 

&&

.MRX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NC...NONE.
TN...NONE.
VA...NONE.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...SR
LONG TERM....KRS
AVIATION...SR
