FXUS64 KMEG 232035
AFDMEG

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Memphis TN
335 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New DISCUSSION...

.DISCUSSION...
(This evening through next Saturday)
Issued at 301 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A nearly carbon copy of yesterday's weather across the Mid-South
right now. Temperatures are in the upper 70s to around 80 degrees
areawide under mostly sunny skies. Winds have been a bit stronger
today with gusts as high as 35 mph along the Delta Region. The 
latest surface analysis places a 1023 mb high over northern 
Georgia with a double-barreled 985 mb low over northeast Colorado 
and central South Dakota respectively. Winds have been 
exceptionally strong between these two systems, as several high 
wind warnings are in effect across the Plains today. 

Aloft, three distinct troughs are analyzed across North America. 
The upper low from Tropical Storm Roslyn over Central Mexico, the
low off the coast of Baja California, and lastly the trough over 
Wyoming. These three systems are expected to phase to the lee of 
the Rockies by tomorrow afternoon. Ahead of the system, deep 
southwesterly flow will setup across much of the Southern Plains 
and Lower Mississippi Valley. The trough is expected to take on a 
negative tilt as it pushes into the region on Tuesday. Several 
models, notably the GFS, HRRR and ECMWF, have sped the system up 
quite a bit. Confidence in severe weather is lower than expected 
with system, as several developing parts need to come together 
quickly. As it stands, synoptic wind fields are very impressive 
with 0-1 km SRH values in excess of 350 and a mid level 80 knot 
speed max. A surface low is expected to develop near sunrise on 
Tuesday morning over central Arkansas and occlude over the Mid- 
South during the late morning and early afternoon hours. This will
leave a rather skinny and short-lived warm sector over portions 
of Mississippi. With such strong forcing aloft, a QLCS is the 
likely storm mode with the potential for embedded circulations
within the line. Instability in the warm sector could approach 
750 J/kg of MLCAPE, but will probably remain below that figure. 
Nonetheless, damaging wind gusts and a few weak tornadoes are 
possible if all of the ingredients come together in that small
window Tuesday morning into early afternoon. The line of storms 
is forecast to be east of the Tennessee River by late afternoon or
early evening Tuesday.

Behind the front, cooler air will settle in for Wednesday and
Thursday. Expect highs in the 60s with lows in the 40s and 50s. 
Temperatures will moderate by late week as upper level flow shifts
southwesterly ahead of an approaching trough. Some timing and 
location differences still exist in the long term forecast,
however, another chance of rain looks likely by late next 
weekend.

AC3

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 1235 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A persistence forecast over the next 30 hours. Low level pressure
will remain relatively tight through the period. Overnight winds
will lose some gust potential, but not decouple completely. FL020
winds tonight will be slightly weaker this evening, with LLWS 
mention thresholds likely met only at JBR.

Expect strong south-southwesterly low level winds to continue 
through the Monday evening MEM arrival push - likely accompanied
by -SHRA near the western TRACON. 

PWB

&&

.MEG WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AR...None.
MO...None.
MS...None.
TN...None.
&&

$$

PUBLIC FORECAST...AC3
AVIATION...PWB
