FXUS61 KOKX 220213
AFDOKX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service New York NY
1013 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure strengthens over the area through Saturday, and
begins to give way to approaching low pressure from the south 
Saturday night. A warm front approaches from the east Sunday 
which remains nearby and weakens through mid-week. A cold front 
may move through Wednesday night, with another possibly 
approaching on Friday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM SATURDAY MORNING/...
Forecast is on track.

Heights will be rising through tonight as a deep ridge
strengthens. A dry airmass with weak subsidence will keep the
area cloud free. Winds will be light southerly, with weak warm
advection, and decouple late. While temperatures inland will
fall into the mid and upper 30s the atmosphere will be dry, with
only potential for some patchy frost. Have continued to not
mention frost in the weather grids.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM SATURDAY MORNING THROUGH SATURDAY NIGHT/...
A deep layered ridge continues to build Saturday into Saturday
night, and gradually weakens late Saturday night as weak low
pressure off the southeast coast, with an inverted trough,
slowly moves into the ridge. While clouds will be increasing 
late Saturday into Saturday night light rain is expected to 
remain just south of Long Island by late Saturday night. Mainly 
used the global model guidance Saturday into Saturday night.

&&

.LONG TERM /SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Surface high pressure will gradually give way to a surface warm
front that approaches from the east on Sunday. A weak area of 
low pressure may form well south of the area late Saturday night
into Sunday, but looks to dissipate well before reaching the 
forecast area. 

There continues to be a great deal of uncertainty in this time 
frame with the placement of the warm front, which is expected to
weaken through mid-week and become an inverted trough. The 
question continues to be whether there will be a break in the 
western Atlantic ridge near the east coast, allowing the 
inverted trough to push farther west and continue chances for 
showers, or do we see the upper ridge expand westward into the 
Ohio and Tennessee Valleys with surface high pressure and dry 
conditions Monday and Tuesday. Due to uncertainty, stuck fairly 
close to the NBM for much of the long term. Depending on the 
strength of this ridge will determine whether another weak area 
of low pressure well off the SE coast may be able to work 
northward along the east coast as advertised by all the 
deterministic models. This could maintain a persistent tropical 
connection aimed at some part of the coast going into mid/late 
week. It's a situation worth watching, as these autumn tropical 
connections have led to some very heavy rainfall events in the 
past for New England and Long Island.

This uncertainty continues into the rest of the long term, with
the possibility of a cold front moving through Wednesday night 
or could be delayed until Thursday as per the GFS, with another 
possible cold frontal passage on Friday.

Thus, the long term is characterized as unsettled, with a 
slight chance (or higher) for showers from Sunday through the 
end of next week. However, the best chance for rain will be 
Sunday and Monday, with only a slight chance for Tuesday and 
Wednesday (mainly dry). Chances then increase towards the end of
the week with the potential frontal passages.

Temperatures will be well above normal with a touch of humidity
for much of the long term, with highs in the 60s to around 70s.
Dew points climb into the 50s and lower 60s in some areas.

&&

.AVIATION /03Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
VFR as high pressure remains situated just offshore into 
Saturday.

S winds around 10 kt possible at some coastal terminals (KJFK,
KBDR) through 04-06z. Otherwise, winds will continue to diminish
and become light and variable overnight. The flow should become
SSW by late morning around 5 kt and then become S-SSE under 10 
kt in the afternoon and early evening. 

 ...NY Metro (KEWR/KLGA/KJFK/KTEB) TAF Uncertainty... 

Winds could stay several kt higher at KJFK through 06z. 

.OUTLOOK FOR 00Z SUNDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY... 
.Saturday night...VFR. 
.Sunday-Sunday Night...Mainly VFR in the morning, then showers 
likely with MVFR-IFR conditions especially E of the NYC metro. NE 
winds 10-15G20kt, especially NYC metro on east.
.Monday...Chance of showers with MVFR to IFR conditions. 
.Tuesday...Slight chance of showers. MVFR conditions possible. 
.Tuesday Night - Wednesday...Chance of showers. MVFR cond likely, 
IFR possible.

Detailed information, including hourly TAF wind component forecasts, 
can be found at: https:/www.weather.gov/zny/n90

&&

.MARINE...
Winds and seas will remain below SCA levels tonight through
Saturday night as high pressure remains over the waters,
weakening Saturday night as low pressure approaches from the
south. The pressure gradient increases late Saturday night as
the low approaches, and east wind gusts on the ocean waters may
approach 25 kt toward Sunday morning.

The approach of a warm front Sunday into Monday may bring a 
northeasterly flow with gusts of 25 to 30 kt late Sunday into 
Sunday night as waves build to 4 to 7 ft on the ocean waters. 
Winds diminish late Sunday night. Waves remain above 5 ft 
through much of Monday. Thereafter, winds and waves remain below
SCA criteria through the rest of next week.

&&

.HYDROLOGY...
No hydrologic impacts are expected tonight through Saturday
night.

Anywhere from 1/3 to 1.5 inches of rain is forecast across the 
area from Sunday through Monday, with the highest amounts across
eastern Long Island and southeast Connecticut and lesser 
amounts as you head west. Recent dry conditions will preclude 
any flooding in these areas, with only minor flooding expected 
at this time.

However, it is too soon to know whether another offshore weather 
system has potential for heavy rain during mid to late week.

&&

.OKX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CT...None.
NY...None.
NJ...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...JP/MET
NEAR TERM...DS/MET
SHORT TERM...MET
LONG TERM...JP
AVIATION...DS
MARINE...JP/MET
HYDROLOGY...JP/MET
