FXUS61 KBUF 220231
AFDBUF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Buffalo NY
1031 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A calm and quiescent weekend is on tap as high pressure nudges north 
from the Mid-Atlantic states to the Atlantic coastline of the 
Northeast. Additionally, temperatures will be on the rise through 
the weekend, with daytime highs warming up nearly 10 to 15 degrees 
above normal this weekend.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY NIGHT/...
Quiet and warmer conditions will last into the weekend as upper 
heights aloft rise and sfc high along and just east of the east 
coast dominates the weather pattern. Pressure gradient between the 
east coast high and strong low over Hudson Bay and low-level jet 
sliding across through tonight will result in a breezy south-
southwest wind at times into tonight. 

The steady winds will keep temps mild tonight with low 40s/upper
30s in sheltered valleys of the Southern Tier/Tug Hill to low to
mid 50s closer to the Lakes. Temps aloft keep warming into 
Saturday and with decent mixing many areas will reach the lower 
70s with at least mid 60s for the higher terrain. Normal highs 
are in the upper 50s to around 60. Winds not as gusty Saturday 
night so temps far inland could drop into the upper 30s. It will
stay quiet with just some high clouds increasing as low 
pressure system begins to edge up east coast late.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SUNDAY THROUGH TUESDAY NIGHT/...
On Sunday...weak low pressure extending northward along the mid-
Atlantic coastline will bring some increase in cirrus-level 
cloudiness to our area...with this most noticeable across the North 
Country. Otherwise high pressure will continue to prevail...with our 
warm airmass (850 mb temps of +10C to +11C) supporting highs ranging 
from the mid to upper 60s across the higher terrain to the lower 70s 
across the lower elevations. 

During the rest of this period the aforementioned weak coastal 
system and its parent mid level low will continue to lift northward 
along the east coast and eventually New England while gradually 
falling apart...with ridging at all levels otherwise continuing to 
dominate our region. The latest guidance continues to show a fair 
amount of west-east spread in the track of the devolving coastal 
system...with the ECMWF and to a somewhat lesser degree the Canadian 
favoring a more westerly track that could bring some light shower 
activity into portions of our area...while the NAM/GFS continuing to 
favor a more easterly path that would keep us completely dry. Given 
this continued bifurcation in the guidance...have elected to 
maintain some slight chance PoPs for the eastern third or so of our 
area for Sunday night and early Monday...with dry weather otherwise 
anticipated. Meanwhile temps will remain well above average...with 
daily highs again mainly in the mid 60s to lower 70s...and nightly 
lows warming from the mid to upper 40s Sunday night to the lower to 
mid 50s by Tuesday night. To put the latter into perspective...by 
Tuesday night lows will either be at or just a smidge below where 
normal highs typically are for the last week of October.

&&

.LONG TERM /WEDNESDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Wednesday and Thursday another weak low may move northeastward along 
the mid-Atlantic and New England coastlines...while a weakening mid 
level trough and associated cold front pushes across the central and 
eastern Great Lakes. The latter system should bring the chance for 
some showers during this time frame...with the latest model 
consensus tending to favor the best potential for these Wednesday 
night. Given the still-distant time frame and the usual model 
differences in timing...have continued to suggest broadbrush slight 
chance to low chance PoPs for now...with these again greatest 
Wednesday night. Following the passage of this system...high 
pressure then looks to build in and bring a return to fair and 
mainly dry weather for Thursday night and Friday. 

With respect to temperatures...these will remain well above average 
on Wednesday when highs will again range from the mid 60s to lower 
70s...with somewhat cooler air following the frontal passage then 
knocking readings back into the upper 50s to mid 60s Thursday and 
Friday...though such readings will still be above average for this 
time of year.

&&

.AVIATION /03Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
For the 00Z TAFS VFR flight conditions are found and these
conditions will prevail through the TAF cycle. There will still
be low end LLWS across the western 4 TAF sites as a decent
pressure gradient exists between a surface high off the eastern
seaboard and low pressure near Hudson Bay. A nocturnal LLJ will
near 35 to 40 knots and when winds are not gusty tonight LLWS 
will occur. 

Tomorrow VFR flight conditions will continue with a SSW wind not
quite as gusty as today.

Outlook... Saturday through Tuesday...VFR.
Wednesday...VFR. A chance of showers late.

&&

.MARINE...
A tight pressure gradient between low pressure over Hudson Bay and 
high pressure along the east coast will support increasing southerly 
winds through Saturday. Given the more southerly wind direction 
though, highest waves will be pushed into Canadian waters. Other 
than far eastern Lake Ontario toward Cape Vincent tonight into 
Saturday, does not appear small craft advisory criteria will be
met in the next couple days on the waters.

&&

.BUF WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NY...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 11 AM EDT Saturday for LOZ045.

&&

$$

SYNOPSIS...EAJ
NEAR TERM...JLA/Thomas
SHORT TERM...Hitchcock/JJR
LONG TERM...Hitchcock/JJR
AVIATION...Thomas
MARINE...JLA
