FXUS64 KLIX 232116
AFDLIX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service New Orleans LA
416 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New SHORT TERM, LONG TERM, AVIATION, MARINE...

.SHORT TERM...
Issued at 249 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

One last quiet day allowing for another pleasant Sunday and 
weekend as a whole. Not expecting much in the way of impacts for 
the next 24-36 hrs but we will begin to see things pick up just a 
tad before the threat of severe weather hits the area Tuesday. 
Models continue to speed up just a tad with Tuesday's system and 
there is a chance we could be rain free by early afternoon for 
most of the area. 

Tonight and through Monday evening will be uneventful for the most 
part. Winds are already starting to slowly come out of the southeast 
and this is increasing the low level moisture over the region. 
Dewpoints currently in the upper 40s to lower/mid 60s will continue 
to rise and should be in the 60s across the entire area Monday 
night. Some of the guidance is trying to suggest lower 70 dewpoints 
across coastal areas but for that to happen it will have to come all 
the way across the Gulf from the Caribbean in less than 36 hours and 
that may be a little overzealous. 

Overnight the pattern will begin to become more amplified. First the 
remnants of former Hurricane Roslyn will continue to work northeast 
across Mexico and merge with the deepening L/W trough over the 
Continental divide. This will also lead to a response in the ridge 
over the western Gulf amplifying and nosing into the Great Lakes 
region. At the same time the main s/w that will lead to our storms 
Tuesday will be working down the backside of the trough The 
combination of the amplifying ridge and strong upstream s/w will 
cause the L/W trough to slow down some and dig even more. Ahead of 
this we will probably see a few light warm air advection showers 
over the marine zones, mainly east of the MS delta. We will continue 
to increase the moisture across the area both in the LL and through 
the column as Pacific moisture (atmospheric river) gets pumped in 
across Mexico and ahead of our system. PWs could be approaching 2" 
and one would think this bodes well for a rather good shot of some 
moderate to heavy rain but there are a lot of negatives in place 
that makes it look like light rain is likely for most of the area. 

Now onto Tuesday's system. Prior to that the base of the L/W trough 
should begin to stop digging over western TX as the mid level jet 
streak begins to round the base of the trough. This will cause the 
system to take on more of an eastward trajectory and by early 
Tuesday morning the core of the h5 winds will begin to move 
downstream and this will cause the disturbance to take on a negative 
tilt and start to lift NE/NNE across the northern portions of the 
Lower MS Valley and into the TN/OH Valleys by Tuesday night/early 
Wednesday. This intense s/w will provide strong forcing and mid 
level flow across the Lower MS Valley. This will also lead to a 
fairly strong sfc low deepening across AR which will lift northeast 
and towards the OH Valley. One problem that is starting to show up 
in the models and given the amount of wind that looks to quickly 
round the s/w, this s/w may be pulling away very quickly and to the 
NNE. Disturbances that take on more of a NNE and not a NE or ENE 
trajectory usually struggle to produce much down in our neck of the 
words. Compared to yesterday the mid level jet core is farther north 
of the CWA and mid lvl hghts are not dropping as much as previously 
thought. We start the early morning hours in southwest flow and then 
gradually become more zonal with no real sharp trough axis moving 
through. H5 hghts now may only fall about 2-3dm over a 12 hr period. 

Aloft the subtropical jet will merge with the northern stream jet as 
it rounds the trough and works across the Lower MS Valley early 
Tuesday. Initially overnight there is fairly good diffluence aloft 
but with the jet quickly moving east and then northeast with the 
core practically crossing the MS River around if not before 12z 
Tuesday we quickly lose the upper lvl support needed for deep and 
efficient thunderstorms. 

In the low levels we will see the winds respond. With the amount of 
lift and forcing helping to deepen the sfc low, LL winds will 
quickly ramp up and a LL jet approaching 60kts will develop and move 
across the Lower MS Valley. Problem, it's looking more and more like 
this LL jet will be displaced north of our area, actually a good bit 
north moving through northeast LA and northern MS. Not only that but 
like everything else this moves through very fast and likely any 
enhancement from it for our area would quickly diminish by 15z. With 
the LL jet pulling away that fast we actually have LL divergence 
that we will have to fight to keep convection going. Combine that 
with the stronger upper level diffluence departing before 12/15z and 
we are already getting on the short end of the stick with respect to 
getting some decent rain. 

Instability wise, this is also becoming less and less favorable 
given the faster timing. This mean less warming before the system 
swings through and lower instability. MLCAPE values could still 
approach 600-800 j/kg across. If the front/prefrontal trough is just 
a tad slower the southeastern half of the CWA may be able to warm 
enough to provide more than sufficient instability but the problem 
is that area has the least amount of support and forcing and what 
good is unstable conditions if there is nothing to actually help to 
lift and create storms. 

Now you may read a lot of this and think, "wow does he want severe 
weather".Issued at 249 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022 No that is not it, 
it is more just looking for some decent rain and this system is 
probably not going to provide that. From a standpoint of severe 
weather if there is any location that has a shot of severe weather
it is the area that SPC has highlighted, the far northwest. 
Southeast of that area we quickly lose support for organized 
storms. So even just thunderstorms, that is looking rough. We 
appear to lose the best upper level support by early morning. LL 
jet is well north and we have divergence in the LL. Most of the 
mid lvl forcing remains north. But if there is one thing that 
really makes me think negative about rain, it is the h5 s/w 
pulling more NNE. Even the CAMS which are just now getting that 
far out are very negative with respect to rain. Most show a fairly
well developed line over eastern TX and crossing into LA but as 
the line move towards the MS river it would continue to weaken to 
where it would be hard to even call it a broken line as it moved 
through our area. 

So, with all of that still holding onto 50-70% pops for most of the 
area but not anticipating much accumulation which given the lack of 
rain is really not going to provide much relief. Rain will also 
probably end by 18z for most of the area and it will be quite 
surprising if there is any rain left by 00z. /CAB/

&&

.LONG TERM...
Issued at 249 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Once the cold front exits eastward, winds will flip back to 
northerly to northwesterly and slightly cooler temperatures with 
highs in the 70s and lows in the 50s from Wednesday to around 
Friday. Winds will be slightly breezy (closer to 10 to 15 mph) and
used NBM90 to reflect higher winds after a frontal passage as 
well as for the next upcoming system near the weekend.

The next system is expected to come through Friday into Saturday, 
with a upper level trough located in the Great Plains digging 
southward, eventually getting a closed low with it, with the low 
approaching near or just north of LA by Saturday. Both the 
deterministic Euro as well as the EPS has the low situated around 
AK, TN and northern MS while deterministic GFS as well as the GFS 
trends south, nearly on top of SE Louisiana or even some members 
have it going into the Gulf. This wide spread difference in 
solutions paints a lot of uncertainty on timing and what precisely 
will happen for our area. If the system ends up trending too far 
south, either only the coastal parishes would get clipped with rain 
or it all just falls into the Gulf. Conversely, too far north and we 
also miss rain either by getting dry slotted if we are just south of 
the low, or misses entirely if it ends up going way further north. 
That being said, wherever the rain ends up falling will actually be 
a decent amount with some potential for heavy rainfall. PW values 
are forecasted to quite high in this system with some of the models 
outputting in excess of 2 inches (which if this solution verified, 
it would be near the daily max climate wise). Severe weather 
potential wise, it seems modest at best with CAPE relatively low for 
this area (250 J/kg or less) and shear will be highly dependent on 
where the center of the low passes. There is a very small window in 
terms of opportunity on Sat morning where bulk wind difference near 
the low is rather high (40 to 60 kts) but it does not really match 
well timing wise.  Currently went with 40-50% PoPs for this forecast.
Anyway for the long story short: at this juncture, too early to 
really say for certain, so it bears watching as the weekend 
approaches, although first guess currently would be less of a severe 
weather threat and more of a heavy rain threat. -BL

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 249 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions will continue for another 24 to 30 hours before we
may start to see some slight impacts from cigs. Until then any 
BKN or OVC skies will be well abv 3k ft and should pose little if 
any problems. Winds will be gusty this afternoon but will quickly 
subside around sunset. /CAB/

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 249 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Mostly quiet marine conditions for the next 24 to 30 hrs but as a
sfc low starts to deepen over the Red River Valley and moves into
the Lower MS Valley winds will begin to pick up. Ahead of our 
Tuesday system southerly winds will continue to increase and we 
will probably need some headlines for Tuesday. Winds will quickly 
go from southerly to westerly Tuesday afternoon and then out of 
the northwest Tuesday evening. /CAB/

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
MCB  57  81  67  77 /   0   0  40  80 
BTR  61  84  69  80 /   0   0  50  70 
ASD  59  83  68  83 /   0  10  40  70 
MSY  64  83  71  82 /   0  10  30  60 
GPT  63  80  69  82 /  10  20  20  60 
PQL  60  79  68  81 /  10  10  20  60 

&&

.LIX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
LA...None.
GM...None.
MS...None.
GM...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...
AVIATION...
