FXUS64 KSHV 231701 AAA
AFDSHV

Area Forecast Discussion...UPDATED
National Weather Service Shreveport LA
1201 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New UPDATE...

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1150 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Southerly winds have have increased dramatically, as expected,
over the last couple of hours. Multiple gusts near 35 kts have
been observed in East Texas. With the exception of a couple of
isolated observations, speeds have so far remained just low enough
to preclude the issuance of a Wind Advisory. Overall, the forecast
for the remainder of today appears largely on track and no updates
are anticipated.

CN

&&

.SHORT TERM...
(Sunday through Monday)
Issued at 346 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Low level moisture advection is underway this morning, indicative
of the extensive low cu and status shield that has developed and
spread NNE across portions of E TX/NW LA/extreme SW AR from SE TX
in the last couple of hours along a 35-40kt SSWrly LLJ. A tight
pressure gradient will persist across the Srn Plains and over the
Wrn half of the region today, well ahead of sfc cyclogenesis over
NE CO that will deepen later this morning before shifting ENE into
Wrn NE/NW KS ahead of the digging longwave trough traversing the
Great Basin into the Desert SW. Low level moisture will begin to
gradually deepen today as the Gulf will remain wide open, as we
await the arrival of the Wrn CONUS trough as it enters the Four
Corners Region tonight. This trough will eventually absorb the
remnants of Hurricane Roslyn over the Ern Pacific as she moves
ashore the Wrn Mexican coast later this morning, and quickly
weakens as she moves across NCntrl Old MX this afternoon. In fact,
some of her moisture will begin to enter portions of S TX late
this afternoon, before sweeping NE across Cntrl and Ern TX and
across much of our region late tonight through Monday morning. The
Wrn CONUS trough will also absorb a second trough W of Baja by
this evening, with this piece of energy ejecting NE into W TX/Wrn
OK Monday. 

Despite the increasing low level moisture advection, believe that
the cigs observed this morning will eventually scatter out later
this morning/early afternoon, with strong insolation again
resulting in another day of above normal temps. The NBM continues
to run a few degrees too cool with max temps, and thus have bumped
these numbers up to similar readings of what was observed
Saturday. Thus will also result in slightly lower min RH's this
afternoon than previously forecast, generally falling to around
40% (+/- 5%). Given the persistent tight pressure gradient and the
fact that at least a couple of wildfires did ignite Saturday
afternoon across Nrn MCCurtain County OK and Hempstead County AR,
will again issue another Fire Danger Statement for the region,
before RH's are able to recover significantly enough tonight and
Monday. Wind speeds and gusts particularly over the Wrn sections
of E TX should remain just below Wind Advisory criteria today, and
this will forgo issuance of this attm.  

Large scale forcing is expected to increase ahead of the
approaching longwave trough to our W, as well as near and ahead of
an attendant cold front that will begin to progress E across NW
TX/Wrn OK late tonight/Monday morning, with some consensus that
some -SHRA may affect the Wrn sections of E TX into SE OK/adjacent
Wrn AR just before daybreak along the SWrly LLJ axis. Have 
maintained low chance/slight chance pops late for these areas,
with these -SHRA gradually spreading ENE through midday, before
the convection deepens and is able to begin expanding farther E.
Thus, pops will increase to categorical for the afternoon across
SE OK/Wrn sections of E TX, with possibly some influence of the
weakening remnants of Roslyn resulting in isolated -SHRA farther E
across Deep E TX into N LA/Srn AR. Despite the increase/deepening
low level moisture Monday, low level warm advection via the
persistent pressure gradient should result in some warming (than
what is currently depicted with the NBM) across Deep E TX/N LA,
and thus have bumped up max temps to the mid 80s here especially
given the fact that min temps tonight will be hard pressed to fall
much below the upper 60s except for NE LA, which should not see as
many low cigs as areas farther W. Convection should continue to
deepen and expand E across the region Monday night, with a minimal
severe threat possible late mainly across Lower E TX into Wrn LA. 

15

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Monday Night through Sunday)
Issued at 346 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Multiple chances of rain will return to the Four State Area in this 
workweek, with some severe weather possible (albeit on the lower end 
intensity-wise) with each chance. Aloft, the synoptic pattern 
driving weather activity this week can be summarized by the 
propagation of two troughs, one currently upstream in the 
Intermountain West and the other (further west) eventually shifting 
southeast over the Gulf of Alaska. The closer trough will shift 
across the Texas Panhandle into our area overnight Monday into 
Tuesday, instigating shower and thunderstorm activity (some of which 
could be severe). That said, ingredients for severe weather will be 
meager as wind shear appears to be the most plentiful (40-50+ kts of 
10m-500mb bulk shear), while CAPE values remain on the lower end 
(500-1000 J/kg). The time of day during the arrival of this 
disturbance will also inhibit optimal convective conditions. 

Zonal flow and surface ridging resumes through the middle of the 
week, bringing dew points back down into the lower 40s for more 
pleasant Fall conditions. By Thursday, the next trough will be 
proceeding across the Intermountain West into the Lower Great 
Plains, creating our next chance of precipitation by the end of the 
week. Long term guidance suggests a similar atmospheric environment 
that will hamper the potential for severe weather once again, 
however, clearer details are yet to be resolved at this time.

Although two disturbances are arriving this week, temperatures will 
not fluctuate much after the first post-frontal airmass delivers 
below normal temperatures on Wednesday, with a slight warmup to near 
normal before the next frontal boundary approaches. Temperature 
maximums will initially fall into the mid-60 and 70s before 
returning to the mid-70s, while minimums will fall from the 50s and 
60s into the 40s and 50s through the rest of the week. The WPC Day 1-
7 QPF has values accumulating at or above 2 inches generally north 
of the I-30 corridor. /16/

&&

.AVIATION...
(12Z TAFS)
Issued at 641 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Low VFR cigs have developed this morning across portions of the
region, which will persist through mid to late morning before
scattering out. Some brief high based MVFR cigs may also develop
through mid-morning, mainly over portions of E TX/SE OK/adjacent
SW AR. Otherwise, a scattered cu field is expected for the
afternoon and evening, with high based MVFR/low VFR cigs again
developing by late evening through the overnight hours over much
of the area. Scattered -SHRA may develop and spread NE into the
Wrn sections of E TX/SE OK by the end of the 12Z TAF period, but
low confidence precludes mention in for the TYR terminal attm.
However, -SHRA are expected to develop/expand ENE into these areas
by mid to late morning Monday, with VCSH mention possible for TYR
before eventually affecting more of E TX/SE OK/adjacent SW AR
through the afternoon. S winds 10-17kts with gusts to 25-30+kts
today will diminish slightly to 6-12kts after 00Z, with gusts to
20kts possible across the Wrn sections of E TX. /15/ 

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
SHV  88  68  84  60 /   0  10  40  90 
MLU  87  63  84  65 /   0   0  10  70 
DEQ  87  66  77  53 /   0  20  80  90 
TXK  87  67  80  59 /   0  10  60  90 
ELD  85  62  82  60 /   0   0  20  90 
TYR  87  70  80  56 /   0  20  80  90 
GGG  87  68  81  56 /   0  10  70  90 
LFK  87  68  83  57 /   0  10  40  90 

&&

.SHV WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
AR...None.
LA...None.
OK...None.
TX...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...09
LONG TERM....04
AVIATION...09
