FXUS64 KLCH 231729
AFDLCH

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Lake Charles LA
1229 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New AVIATION...

.SHORT TERM...
(Today through Tuesday Night) 
Issued at 335 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Early morning sfc analysis looks about the same as 24 hours ago,
with high pressure centered along the Atlantic coast and ridging 
swwd...while low pressure centered over the lee of the Rockies is
maintaining a tighter gradient over the region. Water vapor 
imagery shows weak ridging in place over the area while troffing
continues to deepen over the wrn CONUS. Satellite imagery/sfc obs 
shows partly cloudy skies continuing as scattered cloud cover
continues moving ashore from the Gulf. Obs also showed temps
generally in the 60s across the region, with KBPT in the lower 70s.
Regional 88Ds showed a few light returns over the nwrn Gulf and
moving ashore west of the area, although no regional observations
were reporting any rain at this time.

Interesting forecast coming up over the next day or two. With the
area remaining between the sfc high over the East Coast and low
pressure approaching the Plains, elevated srly winds will remain
the story today...guidance shows winds staying below criteria
today, but this will bear watching as we get later in the day. 
Some of the deterministic model guidance is advertising a little 
slug of deeper moisture moving up into the forecast area today, 
while various CAM guidance is showing spotty light returns 
developing over the coastal waters and gradually spreading inland 
through tonight. However blended guidance isn't really picking up 
on this with POPs generally 10 percent or less throughout the 
first two periods. Not much showing up on radar at this time 
outside of the activity approaching the upper TX coast west of our
forecast area. All in all for now, it appears we cannot rule out 
a few stray showers through tonight. Despite increased cloud 
cover, ongoing WAA will maintain highs in the lower/mid 80s across
all but maybe the immediate coastal areas today, while mins 
tonight look to again hold in the 60s, with temps around 70 across
swrn LA/coastal sern TX.

As we slide into Monday, the digging wrn CONUS trof will help 
pull the remnants of EPac Hurricane Roslyn newd across 
Mexico/Texas into the wrn Gulf region. Meanwhile, an attendant sfc
frontal system is also progged to approach the forecast area with
the approach of the trof. As lift gradually spreads across the
area while moisture further deepens with the Gulf opening up
aloft, expect widely scattered showers to begin developing mainly 
during the afternoon with heating. 

The combo of the trof and sfc front will lead to widespread
showers and scattered storms beginning Monday night and continuing
through fropa on Tuesday. With forecast soundings indicating an
increasing LLJ, with h8 wind speeds approaching 50 knots, along
with plentiful moisture (PWAT values nearing 2.0 inches prior to
the frontal passage) and good dynamics, we could see some severe
storms ahead of/along the front, with damaging wind gusts the
biggest threat...forecast soundings over the nrn zones also
exhibit sufficient helicity values to allow for the potential of a
tornado or two. SPC has highlighted the entire area in either a
marginal or slight risk for Monday night into Tuesday morning to 
account for these factors.

Once the front departs the area, drier air on the backside of the
trof, along with building sfc high pressure, will quickly bring an
end to the convection from west to east, likely by lunchtime.
Temps will plateau early in the 70s before falling slowly through
the day as weak CAA develops. Under clear skies, temps will drop
to the upper 40s/lower 50s by sunrise Wednesday.

25

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Wednesday through Saturday) 
Issued at 335 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

We begin the long term period within a rather benign and mild 
pattern however, things begin to change by the end of the week as 
the progressive pattern continues. On Wednesday, post-frontal 
surface high pressure overhead will provide a light offshore flow, 
mostly clear skies, and afternoon highs in the mid-70s. High 
pressure begins to slide east as we move into Thursday, allowing 
winds to turn back to the east and southeast through the afternoon. 
Onshore flow will bring about a gradually increasing in low level 
moisture on Thursday, allowing for slightly warmer afternoon highs 
as well as a bit more cloud cover. 

Late Thursday the pattern begins to change once again as the next in 
a series of upper level troughs dives across the Rockies, eventually 
becoming closed off over TX by early Friday. At the same time a 
surface low will move out of the Rockies and into TX, becoming 
situated near DFW by early Friday as well. This low pressure system 
will then slide eastward, bringing a warm front north across the CWA 
early Friday followed by a cold front Friday afternoon/evening. With 
decent moisture return expected ahead of this system, rain chances 
begin to increase once again by Friday morning, remaining elevated 
through much, if not all, of Friday. The upper trof begins to weaken 
overhead on Saturday while the surface front exits off to our east 
followed by another round of high pressure building overhead. Drier 
and slightly cooler air will spread into the area through late 
Saturday, bringing about a pleasant end to the weekend. For both 
Saturday and Sunday, highs will once again top out in the low to mid 
70s, while overnight lows will fall into the upper 40s to low 50s. 

17

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 1226 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions are ongoing and expected. The only thing worth
noting are the gusty southeasterly winds this afternoon to evening
with the same thing tomorrow. More cloud cover is building in
ahead of a cold front expected past this 24h period.
Stigger/87 

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 330 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Extended the SCEC headlines through tonight...otherwise no
significant changes to previous marine thinking.

25

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
AEX  85  65  85  64 /   0   0  20  70 
LCH  82  67  82  65 /  10  10  20  70 
LFT  82  66  83  69 /   0   0  20  60 
BPT  84  70  84  63 /  10  10  20  80 

&&

.LCH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
LA...None.
TX...None.
GM...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...25
LONG TERM....17
AVIATION...87
