FXUS64 KLCH 232103
AFDLCH

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Lake Charles LA
403 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New SHORT TERM, LONG TERM, MARINE...

.SHORT TERM...
(This evening through Tuesday Night)

Issued at 340 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Taking a look at our current obs we have similar conditions to the 
days previous. Warm and windy with temperatures in the low to mid 
80s, dewpoints in the 60s and southerly winds gusting around 20-30 
MPH in several places. A few stray showers are passing through SETX
and SWLA with this activity expected to have little to no accumulation
and clear out quickly. Overnight, gusty conditions will taper with
sustained winds remaining elevated throughout the night before becoming
gusty again tomorrow. 

There is an upper level trough centered over the Pacific NW that 
will dig southeast then east across the northern plains. As it does, 
it will pick up the remnants of Roslyn currently over Mexico. This 
will help bring in additional moisture into the area. Isolated
showers will kick off going into tomorrow morning with the
approach of a cold front. Showers and thunderstorms will ramp up
through the day and into the evening, with a Slight Risk of severe
thunderstorms expected. Some severe parameters are looking okay.
We will have lift and decent shear and moisture without a doubt is
plentiful. Instability is not as impressive. The greatest threat
tomorrow would be damaging wind gusts, however there is an
isolated risk of hail and tornadoes. Flash flooding does not
appear to be too much of a threat, though ponding in low lying
areas is possible in areas that receive heavier rainfall. 24H
forecast totals are in the quarter to inch range with locally
higher amounts. However considering that we are dry / in a
drought, the rain will be most welcomed. 


Skies will be quick to clear out Tuesday afternoon with cooler and 
drier air filtering in. At the surface, a high pressure will be 
building in, stretching clean out of Canada to the gulf. Flow 
overhead will be zonal. In regards to temperatures, this cold front 
will not be as strong as the last. Post frontal temperatures will be 
in the low to mid 70s during the day and upper 40s to 50s
overnight.

Stigger/87

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Tuesday night through next Sunday) 
Issued at 340 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Dry weather will prevail for Wednesday and Thursday as high 
pressure transits the region beneath a zonal flow aloft. Skies are
expected to be clear at night and sunny during the day, and the 
dry airmass will allow for a nearly 30 degree temperature swing 
between lows and highs. Daytime temperatures will be just a hair 
cooler than normal Wednesday, with highs in the middle 70s while 
overnight lows are expected to be between 5 and 10 degrees below 
normal with temperatures falling to the middle 40s to around 50 by
Thursday morning. An end to the modest CAA will occur Thursday as
winds veer east to southeast during the day, allowing 
temperatures to moderate to near seasonal normals with highs 
reaching the upper 70s across much of the area. 

Moisture will again increase Thursday night in advance of the next 
upper trough that will be digging southeast toward the southern 
plains. Rain chances will increase from west to east Thursday night 
as lift increases downstream of the shortwave. Surface pressures 
will lower across TX on Friday as the mid and upper system moves 
east, and gradually develop into a closed low or trough along the TX 
coast late Friday. Low level convergence near the surface low/trough 
and ascent provided by the upper system will combine with deep 
moisture (PWATs progged to increase to near 2 inches) to promote 
more widespread rain chances during the day Friday. 

As has been the case for the past few days, global model solutions 
continue to diverge with respect to timing and strength of the 
system. Thus, confidence in the details remains low for Days 6 and 7 
(Friday and Saturday). Will need to monitor the evolution of the 
system over the next several days as the placement and track of the 
upper low will ultimately impact how its surface reflection develops 
(further south will likely suppress thunder/strong storm potential 
while further north could introduce warm sector effects that would 
enhance the possibility). 

24

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 1226 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions are ongoing and expected. The only thing worth
noting are the gusty southeasterly winds this afternoon to evening
with the same thing tomorrow. More cloud cover is building in
ahead of a cold front expected past this 24h period.
Stigger/87 

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 340 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Moderate onshore flow between high pressure over the Atlantic
coast and low pressure over the Plains will prevail into Monday 
night before a cold frontal passage ushers in northerly winds 
through mid-week. Showers and thunderstorms can be expected prior
to and along the front, forecast to push through the coastal
waters Tuesday morning. Wave heights will drop and offshore flow
will hold until the end of the week. By the weekend, onshore flow
will resume with wave heights coming back up slightly.

&&

.PRELIMINARY POINT TEMPS/POPS...
AEX  64  84  64  75 /   0  10  80  40 
LCH  66  82  64  75 /  10  30  80  30 
LFT  65  83  68  78 /   0  20  60  60 
BPT  69  84  62  75 /  10  30  90  20 

&&

.LCH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
LA...None.
TX...None.
GM...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...87
LONG TERM....24
AVIATION...87
