FXUS64 KLZK 231801 AAA
AFDLZK

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Little Rock AR
1255 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New AVIATION...

.SHORT TERM...
(Today through Monday Night )
Issued at 347 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Breezy south winds were noted acrs the Natural State last night and 
early this mrng. This was the result of a strong pressure gradient 
between low pressure ovr Wrn Nebraska and an elongated sfc ridge 
aligned along the Appalachians. Predawn temps were rather mild, 
ranging fm the mid 60s to the lower 70s.

Warmer air, along with low level moisture, wl cont to advect Nwd 
into AR today thanks to contg gusty S winds. Outside of the some of 
the higher elevations, appears most locations wl rmn below Wind Advy 
criteria today. 

Low clouds are also expected to form arnd daybreak, mainly acrs the 
NW half of the FA. The clouds shld sct out by this aftn as mixing 
conts to incrs. Highs this aftn are fcst to range fm the upper 70s 
to the mid 80s, with lows tngt only falling in the upper 50s to the 
mid 60s.

For Mon and Mon night, an upper lvl trof wl move out of the 4-
Corners region, eventually tracking into the Red River Valley in Srn 
OK/N TX by late in the PD. Rain and sctd storms wl incrs fm the W 
starting Mon as an assocd CDFNT apchs AR fm the W. the activity wl 
eventually overspread much of the FA to close out the PD.

One thing to note about rainfall amts. Tropical moisture, assocd 
Hurricane Roslyn, could bcm entrained into the aforementioned 
storm sys as it moves into the Srn Plains. Currently, it appears 
that the heavier rain axis wl be aligned acrs the higher terrain 
of w-cntrl and n-cntrl AR, where 1-3" of rainfall is possible 
Mon/Mon ngt.

&&

.LONG TERM...
(Tuesday through Sunday)
Issued at 347 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The long term PD begins in the midst of a passing dynamic wx system, 
w/ widespread rainfall expected to be ongoing across much of the 
state Tues morning. Aloft, a potent H500 shortwave is fcst to be 
ejecting across the FA, driving widespread synoptic forcing for 
ascent, w/ low-lvl convergence at a relative max invof the 
associated sfc low, which is lkly to be centered over the state by 
this pt in the fcst PD.

Through the day Tues, persistent precip associated w/ the 
deformation zone...and subsequently the warm and cold-air conveyor 
belts...should yield a swath of precip totals nearing 2-3 inches or 
more across portions of Wrn and N/Wrn AR, extending into Nrn AR, w/ 
locally greater totals. Cntrl and S/Ern AR wl lkly see totals 
nearing 1 inch or less. By Tues night, the associated cdfrnt should 
be clear of the state, w/ strong and gusty Wrly winds ushering in 
drier and cooler air, and tapering off rain from west to east.

By Wed morning, the upper shortwave and sfc low wl be quickly 
lifting into the OH River Valley/Midwest, w/ high pressure moving 
into the region and Nrly winds prevailing through the day. 

A stint of dry wx is expected through the latter half of the week as 
sfc high pressure meanders Ewrd. Another bout of scattered to 
widespread rain could be possible by the end of next week, as long-
range guidance remains steadfast on another potent H500 shortwave 
trof coming ashore over the Pac-N/W, and quickly digging into the 
Srn US. As of this fcst cycle, model solns remain more perturbed at 
this point in the fcst, and certainty on PoPs is somewhat low, but 
wl continue to monitor in subsequent fcst cycles. 

Temperatures through the PD should stay near normal readings w/ 
highs generally in the 60s/70s and lows in the 40s/50s at most 
locations.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 347 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Breezy south to southwest winds are expected thru Monday with gusts 
of 25 to 35 mph common. These winds, combined with critically dry 
fuels, will lead to increased fire danger. Humidity will remain 
elevated to mitigate fire weather concerns to a point, but the finer 
fuels such as grasses and brush are more than dry enough to carry 
surface fire with the expected winds. Most Arkansas counties remain 
under a burn ban and any burning is strongly discouraged into early 
next week.

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS) 
Issued at 1241 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Low clouds will become more scattered this afternoon, with VFR 
conditions expected. Low clouds should return late tonight/Monday 
morning, with the potential of MVFR conditions in places. Isolated 
showers are expected to develop in western Arkansas Monday morning. 
Breezy south winds will be noted through the period, although winds 
will decrease somewhat tonight and will be less gusty.

&&

.LZK WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...44
LONG TERM....72
AVIATION...46
