FXUS62 KILM 220139
AFDILM

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Wilmington NC
939 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Low pressure offshore will bring some showers later this weekend,
mainly near the North Carolina coast. A weak cold front will 
likely move through the area later next week.

&&

.UPDATE...
Forecast updated to increase sky cover and low temps a bit over
the Cape Fear region as an area of clouds has been persistent
over this area as seen in IR satellite imagery.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY/...
A weak and somewhat transitory coastal trough is festering 
offshore via the increase in cloud cover. This feature will nick
the coast late tonight as high pressure remains in place more 
inland. I have increased pops just a bit mainly over the coastal
waters for a few hours and can't rule out a sprinkle in the 
Cape Fear area. Some cloud cover may linger around Saturday but 
overall it is expected to remain dry. The air mass modification 
will be mostly replaced by the warm air advection with the 
trough and a more significant trough to move across later in the
weekend. With some insolation expect good coverage of middle 
70s for highs following much warmer morning lows.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SATURDAY NIGHT THROUGH MONDAY NIGHT/...
Forecast confidence: Moderate 

Surface high pressure will prevail inland while low pressure lingers 
offshore, likely weakening Monday. Main forecast challenges revolves 
around rain coverage/amounts. The deepest moisture and best forcing 
will likely be in eastern portions of southeast NC into Sunday, 
although some mainly coastal showers can't be ruled out throughout 
the period. Amounts are forecast to be rather light for now but 
ensemble guidance suggests at least a low risk for some slightly 
greater amounts. The pressure gradient will also keep it a bit 
breezy, especially near the coast. Highs should be held down closer 
to normal through at least Sunday with some warming possible Monday 
while lows stay above normal.

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Forecast confidence: Moderate

Surface high pressure inland should weaken as a coastal trough 
lingers near the coast into early Tuesday and then likely moves 
inland and dissipates. Unsettled weather could return later in the 
period as a rather weak cold front pushes through but timing/impacts 
still uncertain with this feature. Temperatures should warm to well 
above normal levels starting Tuesday.

&&

.AVIATION /02Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
VFR expected through the 00Z TAF period, although a weak coastal
trough remains with FEW/SCT cloud bases around 3-5k ft along 
the coast and offshore, likely to continue into the day
Saturday. Winds steady out of the NNE, up to ~10 kt Saturday
following light winds tonight. Slim chances for light rain
during the TAF period along the coast as well, but chances are
not nearly high enough to include mention in the TAFs attm.

Extended Outlook...Moderate confidence through Wednesday. MVFR 
restrictions likely starting late Saturday night/early Sunday due to 
low clouds and some showers (especially at ILM), with IFR 
conditions possible.

&&

.MARINE...
Tonight through Saturday: Winds and seas will be on the 
increase through the near term period as high pressure remains 
entrenched inland and warm air advection/troughing sets up 
offshore. The gradient increase leads to winds of 15-20 knots by
Saturday afternoon up from the current 10-15 values. 
Significant seas follow a similar trajectory with 3-5 feet 
possible later Saturday.

Saturday night through Wednesday: Forecast confidence this period is 
moderate. Breezy conditions will linger into early next week between 
inland high pressure and offshore low pressure. Probably will 
see 25 kt gusts and some 6 ft seas for most of the local area, 
except maybe the northern SC waters, so Small Craft Advisories 
are a good bet through at least Sunday night.

&&

.ILM WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
SC...None.
NC...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...ILM
UPDATE...MAS
NEAR TERM...SHK
SHORT TERM...RJB
LONG TERM...RJB
AVIATION...MAS
MARINE...SHK/RJB
