FXUS63 KMQT 212322
AFDMQT

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Marquette MI
722 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through early Saturday)
Issued at 223 PM EDT FRI OCT 21 2022

The latest WV satellite imagery shows a shortwave continuing to 
progress eastward through northern Ontario this afternoon with the
associated sfc trough and trailing warm front through central 
Upper Mi. Weak WAA/isentropic ascent continues to support mid-high
level cloudiness ahead of the trough mainly over eastern counties
of the U.P. Expect this cloud cover to diminish into early 
evening as the shortwave exits east through northern Ontario and 
WAA support wanes. Looks like fcst max temps today ranging from 
the upper 50s north half and east to the mid 60s south central 
still look on target. 

Tonight, with models indicating weak ridging moving across the area 
along with clearing skies and light winds, expect min temps to dip 
into the lower to mid 30s inland to upper 30s/low 40s closer to the 
Great Lakes.

.LONG TERM...(Saturday through Friday) Issued at 320 PM EDT FRI 
OCT 21 2022

Pretty significant pattern change underway as shortwave energy 
pushes into the Pacific Northwest and begins to carve a trough out 
over the intermountain west. Downstream ridging will allow upper 
heights to rise significantly across the east half of the U.S. and 
Great Lakes. As the upper trough pushes out into the Plains on 
Sunday Colorado surface low will strengthen into the 980s and lift 
northward to the Canadian border by early Monday. Tightening 
pressure gradient will allow winds to increase and become gusty from 
the south on Sunday with the strongest winds from the south expected 
Monday as the low lifts northwest of the area. Southerly winds over 
land may gust between 35-40 mph over much of the land areas on 
Monday...and locally higher in areas favored by southerly downslope 
winds. While the wind direction will be opposite from the strong 
winds earlier this week, trees damaged by the early week heavy snow 
will likely shed a few more limbs Sunday night through Monday.

While a few warm advection showers will be possible Sunday night 
into early Monday, better chances for showers and isolated 
thunderstorms will hold off until the cold front crosses the area 
Monday night and early Tuesday. As another shortwave rounds the base 
of the southern plains trough on Tuesday, a wave will develop along 
the southern extent of the frontal boundary and lift northeast into 
the southern Great Lakes.  Impacts from that low should remain south 
and east of the U.P.

Temperatures will be much milder this weekend into Monday before the 
cold front passes and returns temperatures to near normal mid to 
late next week. Highs on Sunday and Monday will climb into the 60s 
and perhaps approach 70 at a few locations which would likely be the 
last 70 degree days until next spring. Normal highs right now are in 
the mid/upper 40s so high temperatures will be 20+ degrees above 
normal Sunday and Monday.
&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 722 PM EDT FRI OCT 21 2022

VFR conditions continue through the forecast period.
&&

.MARINE...(For the 4 PM Lake Superior forecast issuance) Issued 
at 320 PM EDT FRI OCT 21 2022

Winds over the east half of the Lake still gusting to 25 kts out of 
the south-southwest will continue to taper off through the remainder 
of the afternoon as they shift to the west-southwest. Winds will 
remain below 20 kts tonight before increasing again to 25 kts late 
Saturday afternoon out of the southeast.  The southeasterly winds 
will remain strong through Monday, approaching gale strength across 
the eastern half of the lake as a low pressure system tracks across 
the Northern Plains into Ontario.  Will continue to hold off on gale 
mention for now on Monday, but it is possible depending on future 
model runs. Water temperatures have cooled back closer to 40 and 
with strong warm advection with the southerly winds the amount of 
overwater mixing is still in question. With sharp low level 
inversion...the highest observational platforms stand a good chance 
at hitting gales but likely won't be the reality near the lake 
surface. Tuesday, winds will weaken to 20 kts and less out of the 
southwest.
&&

.MQT WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Upper Michigan...
None.
Lake Superior...
None.
Lake Michigan...
None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...Voss
LONG TERM...MZ
AVIATION...07
MARINE...TDUD
