FXUS63 KAPX 220210
AFDAPX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Gaylord MI
1010 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1000 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Surface high pressure centered across Wisconsin will continue to
build into northern Michigan overnight. This in combination with
the loss of diurnal mixing will lead to light southerly winds 
overnight. Just a few mid/high clouds tonight as a decaying front 
washes out across eastern upper. Lows tonight ranging from the mid
30s north to the mid 40s south. 

&&

.NEAR TERM...(Through Tonight)
Issued at 228 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...Warm-up begins...

High Impact Weather Potential: None.

Pattern Synopsis/Forecast:

Pattern progression kicking into high gear today as fast zonal flow 
overspreads the northern Conus. Much modified Pacific air 
overspreading the Conus, with a complete retreat of any polar air 
well north into Canada. Increasing southwest flow between east coast 
centered high pressure and weak western Lakes cold front only 
helping the warming cause into northern Michigan, spiking 
temperatures well up into the 50s and lower 60s...values that are 
actually a few degrees above normal for today's date.

Mid level heights continue to rebound heading through tonight as 
troughing digs into western NOAM. Cold front essentially washes out 
as it runs into this increasing ridging, setting the stage for even 
milder temperatures as we head through the weekend.

Primary Forecast Concerns/Challenges:

Temperature and cloud tends through tonight.

Details:

Cold front works into the western sections of the area later this 
afternoon and evening, completely washing out overnight as mid level 
ridging expands north. Complete detachment of any mid and upper 
level support along the front, and deep layer moisture is 
essentially non-existent. Likely to see a bit of increasing clouds 
along the decaying front, but that's about it. Definitely a much 
milder night, with lows ranging from the lower and middle 40s south 
of the big bridge, and mostly in the 30s to its north.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Saturday through Monday)
Issued at 228 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...Warmth continues with rain possible early week...

High Impact Weather Potential: Minimal for now.  

Synopsis/Forecast: Tranquil and milder weather on tap for the 
weekend with general southwest flow aloft while a shortwave digs 
down toward the four corners region. A series of fronts lift north 
through the upper Great Lakes and Ontario through the weekend and 
Monday, bringing rain chances late Sunday through Monday at least 
and above normal warmth. 

On Saturday morning we'll have the weakened front across the Straits 
region. With continued warmth and moisture feed into the area, this 
boundary pushes to our north through the day. We warm up into the 
upper 60's south of the bridge on southerly winds, and skies rapidly 
clearing. To the north however they'll start the day socked in with 
low clouds before gradual clearing as the front passes. Temperatures 
in the north will only make it to around 60. Sunday brings much of 
the same weather, with highs bumping up a bit higher and PWATs 
increasing across the area. Moisture feed will be better to our 
west, but we'll still have PWATs +2 to 3 St. Dev above normal across 
the upper Great Lakes. As the moisture feed continues combined with 
lift well out ahead of the wave through the Plains, we'll see 
showers form late Sunday through Monday.

.LONG TERM...(Monday night through Friday)
Issued at 228 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...Mild and Showery through midweek...

High Impact Weather Potential: Minimal for now. 

Early in the week the Rockies trough separates into two pieces of 
energy, one lifting through Ontario and the other becoming a deep 
cutoff through the southern Plains that eventually turns and lifts 
toward the Great Lakes through midweek. Even through there remains 
large discrepancies in guidance this will keep precip chances going 
through midweek before we dry out again late week. The surface low 
that moves into SW Ontario late Monday will drag a cold front across 
us late Tuesday into Wednesday, which another surface low will ride 
up along into the Great Lakes heading through Wednesday. But 
guidance is struggling with this feature a lot, which will depend on 
the evolution and track of the upper level low. Either way we look 
to have another brief drier/quite spell late in the week as high 
pressure settles in...with continued mild temperatures through the 
period.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 732 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A couple more hours of LLWS in spots, otherwise high pressure will
lead to lighter winds through the taf period. VFR cigs/vsbys
expected over the next couple of days. 


&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 228 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Gusty south-southwest winds will steadily subside this evening, with 
winds becoming fairly light overnight as the pressure gradient 
slackens. South to southeast winds increase in speed again this 
weekend, with small craft advisory conditions likely on at least 
some of our nearshore waters. Otherwise, dry and mild weather 
expected through Sunday.


&&

.APX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MI...NONE.
LH...NONE.
LM...NONE.
LS...NONE.
&&

$$

UPDATE...AJS
NEAR TERM...MSB
SHORT TERM...HAD
LONG TERM...HAD
AVIATION...AJS
MARINE...MSB
