FXUS65 KGJT 231745
AFDGJT

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Grand Junction CO
1145 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 912 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The cold front is currently moving through the southwest corner of
Colorado including the Paradox Valley as of 15Z this morning.
Winds along and just ahead of the front are still producing near
advisory gusts so decided to extend the Wind Advisory until 18Z
for COZ020-21. Farther north in the central Gunnison and
Uncompahgre river basins, winds are now post-frontal and have 
diminished below advisory criteria. Thus, the Wind Advisory in 
COZ011 was cancelled.

Meanwhile, with high confidence of sub-freezing temperatures in 
the remaining susceptible lower desert valleys of eastern Utah 
and western Colorado late tonight into Monday morning, decided to 
upgrade the Freeze Watch to a Freeze Warning. Additionally, 
confidence is high for another night of sub-freezing temperatures 
late Monday night into Tuesday morning so issued another Freeze 
Warning to account for this threat. The end of the growing season 
is a near certainty for these locations, whether it happens 
tonight or tomorrow night. Take precautions now if you have 
sensitive outdoor vegetation.

UPDATE Issued at 602 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Updated to allow Wind Advisories to expire for southeast Utah 
which was largely behind the cold front at 12Z this morning
resulting in reduced wind. Meanwhile, extended the Wind Advisory
for the southwest Corner of Colorado including the Paradox Valley
and the central Gunnison and Uncompahgre River basins through 0900
this morning to account for continued strong pre-frontal winds. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Monday)
Issued at 451 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The strong winter storm promised last week has materialized much
as models had predicted during the night. The trough axis at mid-
levels was over western Utah at 10Z. Meanwhile, its associated 
cold front stretched along a KSBS-KRIL-KPGA line. Radar combined
with surface observations showed widespread precipitation with
snow reaching the surface at lower elevation sites KVEL, K4V0,
KCAG and KHDN which were northwest of the front. To the south,
aside from mountain observing platforms, precipitation was
reaching the ground as rain. Winds remained strong ahead of the
front with automated sensors registering gusts from 45 to near 60
mph. Some lightning was embedded in the showers over southeast 
Utah and southwest Colorado which has enhanced strong synoptic 
flow. 

Models continued to suggest the cold front will sweep across the
remainder of the forecast area and pass east of the Continental
Divide by midday. It's expected that pre-frontal flow will remain
quite strong, so will continue Wind Advisories for a portion of
southwest Colorado through noon. Synoptic lift and instability
will continue to be maximized today as the trough axis moves 
overhead. Per previous discussions, upward forcing extends from 
the surface all the way to the jet level, so precipitation will 
continue to be widespread. Meanwhile, as the colder air filters 
into the region the dendritic growth zone will deepen making 
snowfall production more efficient. Additionally, decent bulk 
shear, CAPE to 350 J/kg and steep lapse rates suggest snow squalls
are possible which could produce heavy snow and severely limit 
visibility throughout the day. 

As the trough axis pushes east of the forecast area tonight snow
will decrease in intensity and will diminish from west to east,
lingering over the Continental Divide through the night.
Consequently, will drop the winter weather warnings and advisories
for the eastern Utah and the western plateaus of Colorado at
midnight while continuing the early season Winter Storm Warnings 
for the Colorado mountains through 6 AM Monday. Meanwhile, the
colder air filtering in with this system may bring a season 
ending hard freeze late tonight into Monday morning for the entire
forecast area. Therefore, a Freeze Watch has been issued with this
package as well. 

Conditions steadily improve Monday as a positive tilt ridge moves
over the area in the wake of this weekends winter storm. Highs
will be much cooler than have been experienced in some time with 
highs expected to only reach levels some 15 to 20 degrees below 
normal for this time of year. 

.LONG TERM...(Monday night through Saturday)
Issued at 451 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Westerly flow will be the dominating pattern by Monday evening. On 
Tuesday, isolated light precipitation could favor the northern 
Colorado Mountains. Another upper level low begins diving south 
through the Pacific Northwest on Tuesday night. It then pushes into 
the Great Basin by Wednesday morning and spreads precipitation 
through at least the northern half of the forecast area by Wednesday 
evening.  As this occurs, west-southwest flow moves over the region 
along with a tightened gradient, leading to slightly gusty winds 
Wednesday into Wednesday night (though not nearly as strong as the 
current system). With a similar track and duration to the first 
trough, subsidence is forecast to move into our region by Friday 
morning. Current solutions look like up to 6 new inches of snow in 
the high country out of 1/10 to 1/2 inch of QPF, depending on 
elevation. Snow levels will start out around 6K feet in most 
locations, but fall to even some low valley floors before the system 
exits and cold air moves in once again under northerly flow by 
Friday.

Temperatures are forecast to be around 5 to 15 degrees below normal 
Tuesday and Wednesday.  Behind the coming low and associated cold 
front, expect a slight drop to 10 to 20 degrees below normal.  This 
will be followed by a rebound to to around 5 degrees below normal by 
next weekend.  Any low valley locations that will have escaped 
freezing temperatures from Monday night are likely to freeze Tuesday 
night. This will more than likely signal the end of the growing 
season across eastern Utah and western Colorado.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1145 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Gusty westerly winds out ahead of a cold front will continue at 
KDRO for another few hours. Winds will subside after the front 
passes. Meanwhile, widespread rain, mixed rain and snow, and snow 
showers will continue to impact TAF sites through much of the 
afternoon. This will result in prolonged periods of MVFR 
visibility and ceilings. Brief IFR/LIFR conditions are possible, 
especially for higher elevation sites where snow is falling. 
Expect ceilings to be persistently below ILS breakpoints at KRIL, 
KEGE and KASE through much of the period. Showers will end west to
east this evening into the overnight. Rapidly improving 
conditions follow into the morning hours on Monday.

&&

.GJT WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CO...Winter Weather Advisory until midnight MDT tonight for COZ003-
     017.

     Winter Storm Warning until 6 AM MDT Monday for COZ004-009-010-
     012-013-018-019.

     Freeze Warning from 2 AM to 10 AM MDT Monday for COZ006-007-020-
     021.

     Freeze Warning from 2 AM to 10 AM MDT Tuesday for COZ006-007-020-
     021.

     Wind Advisory until noon MDT today for COZ020>023.

UT...Winter Weather Advisory until midnight MDT tonight for UTZ028.

     Freeze Warning from 2 AM to 10 AM MDT Monday for UTZ022-024-027-
     029.

     Freeze Warning from 2 AM to 10 AM MDT Tuesday for UTZ022-024-027-
     029.

     Winter Storm Warning until midnight MDT tonight for UTZ023.

&&

$$

UPDATE...MDM
SHORT TERM...NL 
LONG TERM...SS 
AVIATION...TGJT
