FXUS65 KBOU 232042
AFDBOU

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Denver/Boulder CO
242 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday)
Issued at 159 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

An upper level trough was moving into the area this aftn. Mid 
level water vapor imagery shows a disturbance, moving across nrn 
CO, which has been triggering sct convection mainly north of 
Denver to the WY border. Meanwhile, a cold front was moving across
the northeast plains this aftn, with gusty southwest winds ahead 
of it, which has been producing some blowing dust across portions
of Lincoln county.

As the main upper level trough moves across tonight will see 
favorable QG ascent this evening along with favorable lapse rates. 
Thus should continue to see periods of snow over the higher terrain.
At lower elevations, NNE low level flow behind the cold front 
will combine with QG ascent this evening, to enhance shower 
development across portions of the I-25 Corridor and adjacent 
plains. Thus have raised pcpn chances in some areas to likely. 
Analysis of soundings shows most of this precip will be liquid, 
however, there could be some snow mixed in after sunset. Over the 
Palmer Divide, can't rule out an inch or two of snow. Appears 
precip at lower elevations will end by mid to late evening across
the plains.

Finally, as far as freezing temps, some areas will likely have a 
hard freeze along the I-25 Corridor late tonight. Will upgrade 
Freeze Watch to a Warning, however, not exactly sure how 
widespread it will be. 

On Mon, the upper level trough will split as one piece of energy 
moves into the nrn Plains while a second piece of energy moves into 
New Mexico.  Cross-sections show there will be enough moisture to 
keep in a chc of snow showers in the mtns.  Across nern CO, it will 
be dry and cooler with highs in the upper 40s to mid 50s.  In 
addition, there will still be gusty winds across the plains with 
speeds up to 40 mph.


.LONG TERM...(Monday night through Sunday)
Issued at 159 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Near normal temperatures are expected with zonal flow in place 
much of the week. Another trough axis will arrive by Thursday, 
with brief ridging building into the region by Saturday. Another 
trough moves into the area by Sunday or early next week. 
Temperatures should remain near normal values through most of the 
long term period.

Westerly to west-southwesterly flow aloft will continue on 
Tuesday and Wednesday. A few weak shortwaves embedded in this flow
will bring repeated chances of snow across the higher terrain. A 
few snow showers will be around Tuesday, with increasing coverage 
Tuesday night into Wednesday as moisture depth increases. The flow
is well aligned out of the west-southwest with some QG ascent and
a jet nearby. Despite generally favorable factors, accumulations 
should remain below advisory criteria but a few inches is likely 
over the higher peaks.

Our main trough axis arrives Thursday as a positively tilted 
trough moves through the area. Recent guidance has trended towards
a piece of this trough cutting off and diving southeastward into 
New Mexico by late Thursday or early Friday. The mountains will 
pick up additional snow as the flow is initially west-
southwesterly, but the quick moving trough won't allow for too 
much accumulation. Over the plains, some rain and snow showers 
will be possible along a passing cold front. There is some support
from the GEFS and ECME but it's hard to be optimistic for I-25 
snow chances. Either way, cooler temperatures are forecast 
Thursday with highs in the 40s.

Temperatures will bounce back to near normal values Friday and 
Saturday as upper level ridging tries to quickly build. This 
however will be short-lived as another trough brings unsettled 
weather to the region Sunday into early next week.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1002 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Still expect gusty southwest winds to develop in the 17z-20z time
period at DIA. Winds were gusting in the 40's at APA. Winds will
likely stay more WSW this aftn before cold front moves across 
by 23z. Gusty NNE winds will occur behind the front for a few 
hours. There will be a good chance of showers between 23z and 02z 
based on latest data. Ceilings may drop down to 6000 ft or so with
these showers. By 03z, shower threat should end with light NE
winds. Winds overnight should become light drainage.


&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 159 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Critical fire conditions will continue late this aftn but will 
quickly diminish by early evening as a cold front moves across the 
Palmer Divide and east central plains.  

&&

.BOU WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Storm Warning until 6 AM MDT Monday for COZ031.

Winter Weather Advisory until 6 AM MDT Monday for COZ033-034.

Freeze Warning from midnight tonight to 9 AM MDT Monday for 
COZ038>041-043-045-047.

Red Flag Warning until 7 PM MDT this evening for COZ241-245>247-
249.

High Wind Warning until 4 PM MDT this afternoon for COZ046-047.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...RPK
LONG TERM...Hiris
AVIATION...RPK
FIRE WEATHER...RPK
