FXUS65 KPUB 231706
AFDPUB

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Pueblo CO
1106 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 558 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

HRRR and NAMNEST suggest that the mountain wave high winds just
to the lee of Pikes Peak will continue for a few more hours.
Extended the high wind warning until noon. Fort Carson had a peak
wind of 50 knots with KCOS gusting close to 50 knots.  --PGW--

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today and tonight)
Issued at 403 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Messages:

1) Red Flag Warning today for the plains and Interstate 25 corridor.

2) High Wind Warning a mountain wave forming over the foothills of 
the eastern mountains and a widespread high wind event over the 
southern San Luis Valley (SLV) and the the eastern plains, excluding 
El Paso County.

3) Winter Storm Warning for the highest peaks of the Continental 
Divide from midnight tonight through 6am on Monday. There is a 
Winter Weather Advisory for the lower elevations of the eastern San 
Juans and the Sawatch mountains, as well as the highest peaks of the 
Sangre de Cristo Mountains for the same time as the warning. 

Currently: Trough is progressing northeastward with some lightning 
seen in some convective elements, particularly over the southern 
mountains.  Moderate to strong winds are occurring over the CWA with 
some gusts of around 60 mph or greater over and near the southeast 
mountains. KALS had a gust to 55 knots associated with a rain shower 
mixing down stronger winds aloft. Seasonably mild temperatures over 
much of the region with the gusty to strong winds along with mild 
air aloft.  

.Today...Active weather continues as the trough progresses across 
the region.  No significant changes to the forecast.  The trough 
will bring heavy snow to the Continental Divide region, especially 
the eastern San Juans.  Strong winds will produce areas of blowing 
and drifting snow.  The strong winds over the southeast mountains 
and southern Interstate 25 corridor are currently occurring with the 
strongest 700mb over this region.  As the trough lifts northeast, 
cyclogenesis will occur over northeast Colorado.  The core of the 
strongest 700mb wind swill move across southern Colorado during the 
day.  With the daytime instability, strong winds aloft, and pressure 
gradient associated with the developing low, strong winds are likely 
over the San Luis Valley, southeast mountains, and eastern plains. 
Over the plains, wind gusts are around the 50 knot high wind 
criteria.  The potential for blowing dust will add to the hazards 
produced by the winds.  Added Kiowa County to the high wind warning 
has NBM shows some gusts over 50 knots.  Daytime minimum humidities 
will not quite reach as low as 15 percent; however, the strong winds 
and dry fuels will result in higher fire danger despite the RH not 
quite reaching 15 percent.

.Tonight..As the first trough moves to the northeast, winds will 
decrease over much of the region.  Snow will become lighter during 
the evening with the best chances for snow over the mountains of 
Lake and Chaffee Counties with the northwest flow aloft.  Cold front 
moves across the I25 corridor and plains during the evening.  Some 
models suggest a chance for a brief period of light snow over the 
Palmer Divide behind the front.  The front will also bring cooler 
air into the region.  El Paso County has lows in the 20s for tonight 
and issued a freeze watch for this area.  Other locations on the I25 
corridor and plains have lows closer to freezing so suspect some 
frost advisories will be issued tonight.  --PGW--

.LONG TERM...(Monday through Saturday)
Issued at 403 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Messages:

1) Possible first hard freeze for the plains Monday night
2) Another storm system may impact the area Wednesday night/Thursday

Southern stream portion of the upper trough closes off across 
northern NM Monday morning and drops southeastward into eastern NM 
by 00z Tue.  In spite of this closed off solution, models look 
rather dry on Monday with some lingering showers across the 
mountains and far southern portions of the southeast 
mountains/plains especially during the morning hours. Overall, not 
expecting much impact from this as any additional snow across the 
central mountains, where northwesterly flow will provide best 
orographics, will be spotty and light as drier air works in. 
Easterly upslope across the southern Sangres is fairly weak with 
deepest moisture confined farther south into NM and the TX 
panhandle.  Pops will carry generally isolated to low end scattered 
category values with a decreasing trend in the afternoon. Otherwise, 
expect temperatures to drop below normal for afternoon highs.  

Monday night will be the first potential hard freeze across the 
southeast plains where an end of the season freeze has not yet 
occurred. Suspect day shift will be hoisting a freeze watch for most 
of the area, but with multiple headlines already out, and a freeze 
watch extending into Monday morning, will let later shifts address 
this as other impact headlines for today expire.  

A brief reprieve in the weather returns for Tuesday with 
temperatures returning to near normal.  Another potential freeze 
will occur Tuesday night if the end of season freeze doesn't quite 
make it Monday night.  Another storm system will approach from the 
northwest on Wednesday which will bring a return of snow showers to 
the mountains and gusty winds to the southeast plains though gusts 
do not look quite as strong as today's system.  RH values are 
running above 15 percent, so some near critical fire weather 
conditions will be possible but thresholds may come up just shy due 
to cooler temperatures.  Much like the previous system, southern 
stream energy closes off an upper low across northern NM which drops 
southeastward.  This will bring strong cold front through the plains 
late Wed night/Thursday morning with the possibility of showers 
spread in behind it.  Lower eastern slopes of the southeast 
mountains could pick some light accumulations if winds pull around 
from the NE providing a brief window for upslope flow. System is 
another quick mover though which should keep accumulations on the 
light side.  It dries out and warms up again for late week into next 
weekend. -KT

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1106 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions are expected over KALS, KCOS, and KPUB throughout
the forecast period, unless blowing dust develops over the
terminals, then MVFR conditions are possible. The very strong
winds will persist throughout the afternoon and the early evening.
Expect wind gusts to weaken at around 00z. Winds will remain
northerly over after all of the forecast points through the rest
of the period after the winds weaken. 

&&

.PUB WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Weather Advisory until 6 AM MDT Monday for COZ058-061-067-
073-075.

Winter Storm Warning until 6 AM MDT Monday for COZ060-066-068.

High Wind Warning until 6 PM MDT this evening for COZ070-071-074-
075-079-080-086>089-093>099.

High Wind Warning until noon MDT today for COZ084-085.

Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for COZ226>237.

Freeze Watch from late tonight through Monday morning for COZ084-
085.

&&

$$

UPDATE...PGW
SHORT TERM...PGW
LONG TERM...KT
AVIATION...SKELLY
