FXUS65 KPUB 232112
AFDPUB

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Pueblo CO
312 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday)
Issued at 312 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

1) Red Flag Warning expires at 8PM tonight, the High Wind Warning 
expires at 6PM tonight, and the Winter Weather Highlights expire at 
6AM tomorrow. The winter weather products may end early, however. 

2) Freeze Warning has been issued for El Paso County and the lower 
elevations of Huerfano and western Las Animas Counties. A Frost 
Advisory has been issued for Fremont, Pueblo, Crowley, and Otero 
Counties. 

Meteorological Discussion:

The issued highlights seem to be working out well with High Wind 
Warning criteria winds being observed across much of the state. 
There may be places that don't verify, but wind gusts have been very 
close to criteria. The RH values over the I-25 corridor have not hit 
the 15% threshold for Red Flag Warning criteria, however the very 
strong winds would still cause rapid fire development if a fire is 
started. The eastern plains are verifying RFW conditions quite 
nicely. Snow over the mountains has been very spotty, since the 
highest snowfall and snowfall rates have been falling underneath 
snow bands. So as an example, Monarch Pass has not seen much snow, 
but just to the north of the pass some heavier snowfall has fallen. 
So overall, places, like Wolf Creek Pass, have verified nicely with 
heavy snow and winter weather conditions, but verification will 
likely be spotty. 

A Freeze Warning has been issued for El Paso County and the lower 
elevations of Huerfano and western Las Animas Counties. Low 
temperatures tonight are expected to reach the mid to upper 20s for 
a few hours. A Frost Advisory has been issued for eastern Fremont, 
Pueblo, Crowley, and Otero Counties. Exposed pipes are at risk for 
bursting under the areas where a Freeze Warning is in effect and 
sensitive vegetation is at risk under the Frost Advisory areas. 

Light snow will likely continue over the Continental Divide, 
especially over the Sawatch Mountains, but rates and accumulations 
begin to decrease during this period. By tomorrow afternoon the 
upper system propagates far enough east for its surface cyclone to 
develop and strengthen over central New Mexico. As the cyclone 
develops some deformation induced precipitation is expected to form 
over the southern plains and the Raton Mesa. Snow levels will be 
around 5kft, which will enable light snow showers over the higher 
elevations of the Raton Mesa. Impacts will be minimal. 

High temperatures tomorrow will be well below average with values in 
the 40s and 50s over the plains, the 40s over the mountain valleys, 
and the single digits to the teens over the mountains. 

.LONG TERM...(Monday night through Sunday)
Issued at 312 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Key Messages:

1) Possible hard freeze for the plains Monday night/Tuesday morning. 

2) Another storm system Wednesday night/Thursday?

Monday night-Tuesday...Moderate northerly flow aloft across the 
region Monday night weakens and becomes more west to northwest 
through the day Tuesday, as this weekends system continues to 
translate north and east across the southern High Plains. Models 
remain consistent with decreasing winds and clearing skies across 
the region, combined with cold air in place, leading to rather 
chilly overnight lows in teens and 20s areawide, coolest over the 
higher terrain. With lows possibly falling into the 20s leading to a 
hard freeze overnight across the eastern plains, have issued a 
Freeze Watch for the last areas that have not seen a widespread 
freeze, namely Pueblo, Crowley, Otero, Bent and Baca Counties, along 
with eastern portions of Fremont and Las Animas Counties. Highs on 
Tuesday look to warm back to near seasonal levels. 

Wednesday-Thursday...West to northwest flow remains progged across 
the region with another eastern Pacific system progged to dig across 
the Intermountain West and across the Rockies. Models continue to 
differ on this systems location as it translates across the Rockies, 
and are also indicating the potential for the system to dig further 
west, leading to differences in precipitation amounts through this 
period. With that said, have continued to followed NBM guidance 
which keeps the best chances of precipitation over and near the 
higher terrain in the Wednesday night through Thursday night 
timeframe, with temperatures at or above seasonal levels on 
Wednesday and at or below seasonal levels on Thursday.  

Friday-Sunday...Depending on the evolution of the mid week system, 
models do indicate drier and warmer weather with upper level ridging 
returning to the region for next weekend.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Monday evening)
Issued at 312 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions are expected over all forecast points throughout the 
forecast period. The strong winds over all of the forecast points 
will decrease at around 00z, decreasing even further as the evening 
progresses. By around 06z winds will be relatively light, but will 
be prevailing from the north. By tomorrow afternoon for KCOS and 
KPUB SE winds may briefly form in the afternoon, but will be taken 
over by northerly shortly after sunset.

&&

.PUB WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Weather Advisory until 6 AM MDT Monday for COZ058-061-067-
073-075.

Winter Storm Warning until 6 AM MDT Monday for COZ060-066-068.

High Wind Warning until 6 PM MDT this evening for COZ070-071-074-
075-079-080-086>089-093>099.

Frost Advisory from midnight tonight to 9 AM MDT Monday for 
COZ083-086-089-093.

Freeze Watch from late Monday night through Tuesday morning for 
COZ083-086-089-093-094-097>099.

Red Flag Warning until 8 PM MDT this evening for COZ226>237.

Freeze Warning from midnight tonight to 9 AM MDT Monday for 
COZ084-085-087-088.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...SKELLY
LONG TERM...MW
AVIATION...SKELLY
