FXUS65 KBOU 231617
AFDBOU

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Denver/Boulder CO
1017 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1002 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Snow showers were beginning to increase over the higher terrain
and should continue thru the aftn as the upper level trough moves
across. Across the plains, gusty winds were continuing mainly
south of a Denver to Akron line. Still may see a few gusts from 55
to 60 mph over eastern portions of Elbert county and Lincoln
county through mid aftn with some blowing dust.

Meanwhile with less cloud cover have raised highs over the plains
around 5 degrees from previous values. A cold front was along the
WY-CO border and will gradually moves across the plains this aftn.

For early this evening, latest data suggests low level winds will
be NNE. Thus with a more upslope component may see a better chc of
showers along the I-25 Corridor and adjacent plains. Temps may get
cold enough for some snow mixed in, however no accumulation is
expected. The only exception would be over the Palmer Divide where
a few inches could occur. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today and tonight)
Issued at 309 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A potent storm system will bring snow to the mountains, wind and
fire weather conditions to the plains, and much cooler conditions
area-wide by later today. On GOES-16 the trough is currently 
moving across southern Nevada with plenty of moisture streaming
out of the southwest ahead of it. There has been a fair amount of
lightning in western Colorado ahead of the trough. Snow should
start across the higher passes in our area shortly. Upslope flow
will initially be out of the southwest, not great for the Front
Range but not bad for the Park and Gore Ranges. It will also 
start out quite warm until the 700 mb front arrives later in the
day. Snow levels across the west slope will be around 7,500-8,000
feet until early afternoon when the cold air aloft arrives. By 6 
PM the snow level should be around 6,000 ft across our area. 
However, with strong downsloping winds we don't expect much 
precipitation to fall across the plains until later in the evening
(see details below). There could be a snow squall associated with
the cold front moving across the mountains, with the best chances
for that occurring between 3 and 7 PM. Lapse rates aloft are also
favorable for decent snow rates throughout the day into the 
evening hours. A 120 kt jet should be overhead too though the best
jet dynamics for banded snow should be south of our area for the 
most part. Given the good synoptics, upslope, lapse rates, 
moisture, and frontogenesis, snow totals today into early Monday 
look on track. We expect 4-8 across the Front Range above 9,000 
ft, 5-9" for the mountains of Summit County, and 8-12" for the 
Park Range. The mountain valleys could pick up 1-3". All winter 
weather highlights will remain in place through Monday morning. 
Travel will likely be impacted across the I-70 and US-40 corridor 
above 8,500 ft by late afternoon.

Wind is the story across the plains today. South of a DIA to Akron
line, the strong winds combined with RH dropping to around 15%
will result in red flag conditions this afternoon (see Fire Wx
Discussion below). We have hoisted a high wind warning for Lincoln
and E. Elbert Counties for strong southwest winds ahead of a cold
front. The HRRR wind swath product, as well as the NBM4.1, all
point to several hours of gusts to 60 mph, roughly from 10 AM to 4
PM. Fire wx conditions will last longer than that, but winds
should rapidly weaken between 6-7 PM. During the afternoon hours,
areas of blowing dust are likely, especially in the high wind
warned area. Travelers on I-70 east of Deer Trail should be
prepared for occasional low visibility due to dust and southwest 
winds gusting to 60 mph this afternoon.

Temperatures across the plains will initially be warm with
downsloping flow ahead of the cold front. Temperatures will be in
the low to mid 60s by midday, even some mid 70s across the
northeast corner. Gusty west winds will occur for most areas east
of the Divide ahead of the cold front. The cold front arrives by 
mid afternoon out of the northwest, and temperatures should drop 
into the mid to upper 30s by the late evening hours. Gusty west- 
northwest winds will occur behind the front, with gusts to 40 mph 
in many area. The wind direction will make it hard for any 
precipitation to reach the ground initially, but model guidance
(especially the GFS) insists precipitation will reach the ground 
roughly along I-76. There will be strong mid- level frontogenesis 
during the evening hours, as well as some convective instability 
with the 500 mb cold pool moving overhead around midnight. We've 
including light precipitation across much of the plains for the 
evening into early morning Monday hours. If it does precipitate, 
it may start off as rain but wet bulbing should change it to snow 
quickly. A trace of snow is not out of the question but confidence
in any precipitation is low. The thing arguing for precipitation 
is the strength of the short wave trough and cold front, which can
sometimes overwhelm the downslope flow. We are waiting to see if
the high res models pick up on the precipitation like the GFS and
other global models are, and if they do the forecast for precip
could change quickly this evening.

The final thing we need to highlight is the chance for a freeze in
areas that have not already had one, which is the I-25 corridor
and Palmer Divide. Latest high res guidance would favor a hard
freeze across the Palmer Divide and Lincoln County Monday morning.
This seems reasonable given clearing skies, very dry air, and
light winds. However, the HRRR and other high res models paint a
marginal picture for the Denver-Boulder metro area north to Fort
Collins. The coldest guidance is 30-34 degrees for Monday morning
in those areas. For these reasons, will keep the freeze watch in 
place given the uncertainty, and let the day shift re-evaluate the
freeze potential and any potential upgrade to a warning.

.LONG TERM...(Monday through Saturday)
Issued at 309 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

An elongated trough with two main shortwaves, one to the north of 
Colorado and one to the south of Colorado, will be over our forecast 
area on Monday. This trough will be departing and NVA on the 
backside of the trough will work to dry conditions out. There will 
still be some lingering snow showers across the higher mountains due 
to low level moisture within northwesterly flow but snow amounts 
will be very light. Northwest winds at the surface will be gusty 
especially across the northern mountains and near the Cheyenne 
Ridge. Temperatures will be below normal across our CWA with 
highs in the upper 40s to low 50s across the plains. 

On Monday night, a mountain wave will setup across the northern 
mountains and foothills which will create strong winds. Gusts could 
reach 55 mph in the usual windy spots in Larimer and Boulder 
Counties and the forecast wind speed grids were increased to 
account for this. The winds are not expected to reach out onto the
plains into the cities of Boulder and Fort Collins. Low 
temperatures will be similar if not a degree or two warmer than 
Sunday night. Therefore, a Freeze Watch was not issued but it may 
be needed if Sunday night is warmer than expected and Monday night
becomes a couple of degrees cooler. 

Zonal flow will move over Colorado on Tuesday with a very weak 
shortwave trough moving across. There will be a few very light snow 
showers across the higher mountains but the snow amounts will be 
minimal. Temperatures across the plains will warm to near normal for 
this time of year which is about 60 degrees in Denver. 

Flow aloft will become slightly more southwesterly on Wednesday 
ahead of a trough that moves over the Pacific Northwest. Highs 
across the plains will be similar to Tuesday with temperatures in 
the upper 50s to low 60s. Some Pacific moisture will make it to the 
northern mountains of Colorado and snow showers will form as a 
result. The plains should remain dry during the day on Wednesday. 

Wednesday night and into Thursday, the trough will deepen and move 
towards the Four Corners region. Recent model runs have this system 
staying more positively tilted which would not be good for those 
wanting snow along the I-25 corridor. Having said that, there is 
expected to be some low to mid level frontogenesis that could create 
a couple bands of rain and snow showers over the foothills and I-25 
corridor. So it is possible that Denver receives its first 
measurable snowfall of the year but it's not set in stone. Roughly 
half of ECMWF ensembles have accumulating snow at KDEN while only 
about a third of Canadian and GFS ensembles do. There is higher 
confidence that the mountains will receive light to moderate 
snowfall amounts during this period. Temperatures will be below 
normal across most of our CWA and depending on the strength of the 
system, Denver could struggle to get much above 40 degrees. 

The trough will move east of Colorado on Friday with a ridge 
building in behind it through most of the weekend. Friday through 
Sunday will see a period of dry weather with warming temperatures.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1002 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Still expect gusty southwest winds to develop in the 17z-20z time
period at DIA. Winds were gusting in the 40's at APA. Winds will
likely stay more WSW this aftn before cold front moves across 
by 23z. Gusty NNE winds will occur behind the front for a few 
hours. There will be a good chance of showers between 23z and 02z 
based on latest data. Ceilings may drop down to 6000 ft or so with
these showers. By 03z, shower threat should end with light NE
winds. Winds overnight should become light drainage.


&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 309 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Very strong southwest winds will occur across much of the plains 
this morning into early afternoon. Winds across Lincoln County are
expected to gust to 60 mph around midday, with RH dropping into 
the 15-20 percent range. Elsewhere, winds could gust 40-50 mph, 
roughly along and south of a DIA to Akron line. A cold front will
shift winds to the west-northwest, and generate wind gusts over 
35 mph in the mid-afternoon hours. However, RH should increase 
behind the front, improving fire wx conditions. But given the 
atmospheric dryness ahead of the front, and continued strong 
winds, we will keep the RFW in place through 7 PM. Winds will drop
quickly after 7 PM and with much colder air in place, RH will 
rapidly recover to well over 50% before midnight across the area.

&&

.BOU WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Storm Warning until 6 AM MDT Monday for COZ031.

Winter Weather Advisory until 6 AM MDT Monday for COZ033-034.

Freeze Watch from late tonight through Monday morning for 
COZ038>041-043-045-047.

Red Flag Warning until 7 PM MDT this evening for COZ241-245>247-
249.

High Wind Warning until 4 PM MDT this afternoon for COZ046-047.

&&

$$

UPDATE...RPK
SHORT TERM...Schlatter
LONG TERM...Danielson
AVIATION...RPK
FIRE WEATHER...Schlatter
