FXUS65 KGJT 232055
AFDGJT

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Grand Junction CO
255 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(Tonight through Monday night)
Issued at 242 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A closed-low over the northern Rockies continues to dominate the 
weather pattern today. Very moist flow, good dynamics, and
orographics has combined to generate quite impressive 
precipitation totals across the area. In addition, snow levels 
continue to fall as colder air moves south across the region with
snow being reported across valley locations at this time. Snow 
amounts around a foot have been reported at some higher 
elevations. Latest radar/satellite shows a strong band of 
precipitation slowly rotating across western Colorado and eastern
Utah. Expect snow levels to drop in these heavier bands of 
precipitation with heavy snowfall, isolated thunderstorms and 
reduced visibility expected through the afternoon hours. Snow 
will continue over the forecast area into the evening hours before
diminishing overnight. The best focus for snowfall will be over 
the northern and central mountains of western Colorado including 
the northern San Juans with light to moderate additional 
accumulations expected. Have allowed all winter highlights to 
continue, however, have cancelled the WSW over the Uinta 
mountains where the snow has tapered off. Very cold air is 
expected tonight and Monday morning with numerous Freeze Warnings
continuing across the forecast area.

 As the main storm moves northeast across the Dakotas by Monday 
morning a secondary piece of energy will drop southeast and become
closed off over New Mexico. This system will slowly move east 
across Texas on Monday with minimal impact for the forecast area. 
Wraparound flow will allow snow showers to continue across the 
higher terrain favoring north-facing slopes with little to no 
additional accumulation expected before diminishing later Monday. 
Another very cold night is expected across the region with 
numerous freeze warnings issued over the area. 


.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Sunday)
Issued at 242 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A cold and unsettled weather pattern is in store for most of the 
work week as a series of storm systems impacts the western US. A 
weak shortwave will bring increasing clouds on Tuesday with snow 
over the higher elevations across the northern sections of eastern 
Utah and western Colorado Tuesday night into Wednesday. 
Overrunning and good dynamics in response to the left exit region 
of the jet will augment amounts across the north with light to 
moderate accumulations possible by late Wednesday. A stronger 
storm system is forecasted to drop southeast across the Great 
Basin on Wednesday into Thursday. As the pressure gradient 
tightens ahead of this storm system, gusty southwest-west winds 
can be expected across the forecast area on Wednesday and 
Wednesday night. Precipitation is expected to increase and become 
more widespread as the shortwave moves southeast across the 
forecast area Wednesday night and Thursday. Light accumulations 
are expected with this system with a lesser probability of 
moderate accumulations by Thursday evening. A progressive ridge 
will moves across the region on Friday with dry and warming 
conditions into the weekend. Forecast confidence is low by next 
weekend as ensemble blends showing run-run inconsistency. A low 
confidence trend shows southwest flow increasing ahead of a 
deepening Pacific storm system moving across the northern Rockies 
by Sunday. Temperatures will run unseasonably cold through the 
work week with a slow warming trend by the weekend. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1145 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Gusty westerly winds out ahead of a cold front will continue at 
KDRO for another few hours. Winds will subside after the front 
passes. Meanwhile, widespread rain, mixed rain and snow, and snow 
showers will continue to impact TAF sites through much of the 
afternoon. This will result in prolonged periods of MVFR 
visibility and ceilings. Brief IFR/LIFR conditions are possible, 
especially for higher elevation sites where snow is falling. 
Expect ceilings to be persistently below ILS breakpoints at KRIL, 
KEGE and KASE through much of the period. Showers will end west to
east this evening into the overnight. Rapidly improving 
conditions follow into the morning hours on Monday.


&&

.GJT WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CO...Winter Weather Advisory until midnight MDT tonight for COZ003-
     017.

     Winter Storm Warning until 6 AM MDT Monday for COZ004-009-010-
     012-013-018-019.

     Freeze Warning from 2 AM to 10 AM MDT Monday for COZ006-007-020-
     021.

     Freeze Warning from 2 AM to 10 AM MDT Tuesday for COZ006-007-020-
     021.

UT...Winter Weather Advisory until midnight MDT tonight for UTZ028.

     Freeze Warning from 2 AM to 10 AM MDT Monday for UTZ022-024-027-
     029.

     Freeze Warning from 2 AM to 10 AM MDT Tuesday for UTZ022-024-027-
     029.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...MPM
LONG TERM...MPM
AVIATION...TGJT
