FXUS63 KPAH 212305
AFDPAH

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Paducah KY
605 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SHORT TERM...(Tonight through Sunday night)
Issued at 225 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Daily afternoon rh minimums will uptick this weekend 
as surface dew points begin making a recovery, but so will winds
(and temps). This will effectively offset and combine with 
continued very dry fuels from the drought conditions, to heighten 
the fire danger until appreciable rain chances appear in the 
forecast early next week. Falling short of official red flag 
criteria, we'll continue to highlight this potential hazard via 
the SPS/HWO and social media products.

The aforementioned wind fields will crank up as southerlies, as 
surface high pressure ridges and more or less anchors across the 
Eastern U.S., while low pressure develops and approaches from our 
west. This tightens the gradient here and yields some daily, mainly 
peak heating hours gust potential, with breezy daytime winds 
expected thru the entirety of the weekend. As a result of the 
prolonged moderate southerlies, we'll see the thermometer uptick as 
well. Highs will return to the upper 70s and lower 80s, or about 10 
degrees above seasonal norms. Lows will likewise be in that same 
range above climo, as they bump up thru the 50s over the course of 
the weekend. 

The overall strength and nearer proximity of the High, vs the still 
distant and developing Low, will hold off pcpn chances until early 
next week.

.LONG TERM...(Monday through Friday)
Issued at 225 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

For the start of the long term forecast period, an upper-level ridge 
will be positioned over the Eastern U.S., while a strong trough 
axis stretches from Minnesota to New Mexico. Two areas of low 
pressure will be located in that trough; the northern one in 
Manitoba and a southern one that will develop in the Central 
Plains. A cold front stretches from the northern low to the 
southern low. Ahead of the front, breezy southerly winds Monday 
will keep highs near 80. The NBM has caught up with the model 
trend of keeping conditions dry on Monday.

Moisture advection increases Monday night with dew points rising
into the lower half of the 50s as the southern system approaches.
Rainfall chances begin in far western portions of the CWA Monday 
evening, then expand to most of the area by dawn, except for the 
KY Pennyrile. This timing is delayed relative to the previous 
forecast, a scenario that was indicated as likely in that 
forecast. Ensembles still have slight differences as to the best 
timing for precipitation Tuesday-Tuesday night. The GEFS leans 
later and the Canadian ensemble leans faster. Moisture advection 
with the system lines up more favorably in Missouri, and storm 
total QPF reflects this with over an inch of rain for the Ozark 
foothills vs under half an inch for eastern portions of the CWA. 
This rainfall would be very welcome given ongoing drought 
conditions. Thunderstorm potential is quite limited, with only a 
slight chance included for SEMO as the center of the low is moving
across/near the area Tuesday afternoon/evening. Rain chances 
decrease from west to east afterwards, possibly lingering during 
the morning Wednesday. 

Dry weather moves in later in the day Wednesday as the system exits. 
A low pressure system may develop late in the week in northern 
Texas, which could result in rainfall beyond the 7 day forecast, but 
ahead of it, we will slow the warming trend as easterly winds 
remain on Thursday.

Highs near 80 on Monday drop to the 60s Wednesday following the 
frontal passage, then slowly increase afterward. Lows trend 
similarly, in the upper 50s Monday night, dropping to the lower 
40s Wednesday night, and then a slow rise afterward. 

&&

.AVIATION...
Issued at 602 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Very dry air in place across the region will keep VFR conditions
at each of the TAF sites. The main concerns will be gusty winds
(south gusting to 25kts) each afternoon and then the potential 
for LLWS each night as the boundary layer decouples and the 
inversion sets up. Did include the mention of LLWS at each TAF 
site with this update and will likely need LLWS for Saturday night
as well.

&&

.PAH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IL...None.
MO...None.
IN...None.
KY...None.
&&

$$

AVIATION...KC
