FXUS63 KDMX 212343
AFDDMX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Des Moines IA
643 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...Updated for the 00z Aviation Discussion...

.DISCUSSION.../Tonight through Friday/
Issued at 226 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Key Messages:

- Quite warm this weekend, windy Sunday
- Limited storms chances late Sunday night into Monday 
- Cooler next week with precipitation chances lingering at least 
into mid week

Discussion:

Temperatures have warmed nicely into the afternoon, reaching the 70s 
for much of the area by mid afternoon. Ambient weather today is 
quiet across the region with perhaps the only notable feature being 
a frontal boundary draped across central Iowa resulting in a wind 
shift with northerly winds across northern Iowa and southwesterly 
winds across southern Iowa. The boundary will remain hung up over 
Iowa into the evening before being pulled north overnight as a 
shortwave moving north of the area puts Iowa in the warm sector of 
the system.

Saturday will be another warm day, though winds being to increase as 
the pressure gradient tightens across the area thanks to an 
approaching western US system. This will be maximized on Sunday as 
soundings indicate dry, deeply mixed profiles with winds of 40-45+ 
kts at the top of the mixed layer which places most of the area very 
near wind advisory criteria, something to monitor over the next 
24 hours. While relative humidity will be increasing ahead of the
system, this will still result in elevated fire concerns. Dry 
fuels, especially ag, will aid the concerns and those finishing up
the harvest this weekend will want to use extra care. 

Recent model runs have continued to trend slower with the late 
weekend system, pushing off chances for storms later Sunday evening 
and into Monday. Sounds look less impressive with little in the 
way of instability to work with and a bit of a cap which would 
limit convective development. Should storms develop, damaging 
winds would be the primary threat thanks to the abundance of low 
level dry air. rain lingers Monday as a reinforcing vorticity max 
rounds the base of the parent rough and quickly lifts into the 
midwest. By midweek another system may lift into the area and may 
bring additional rain to the area, though there remains 
considerable run to run inconsistency in the track at the moment.
Stay tuned. All systems accounted for, by mid week model QPF 
across Iowa is a widespread half inch with a likely axis of 
1-1.5". While not a drought buster, this would certainly be 
welcome. 

&&

.AVIATION.../For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening/
Issued at 632 PM CDT Fri Oct 21 2022

VFR conditions are expected through the period. A wind shift from
east northeast to southerly is expected to slowly take place 
through tonight, but winds will be light at the surface. However, 
some low-level wind shear is expected at KDSM and KOTM overnight 
into the morning. Wind gusts will then pick up tomorrow, likely 
exceeding 20kts throughout the day with gusts potentially reaching
25+ kts at times. 

&&

.DMX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NONE.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...Hagenhoff
AVIATION...Dodson/Curtis
