FXUS63 KIWX 212307
AFDIWX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Northern Indiana
707 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Issued at 350 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Breezy and mild conditions will continue through the weekend and 
into the first part of next week. High temperatures Saturday through 
Tuesday will reach into the 70s. Temperatures will cool toward the 
middle of next week as the next system brings a good chance of 
rain along with cooler temperatures.

&&

.SHORT TERM...(This Evening through Saturday)
Issued at 350 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

A quiet short term period in store with a continuation of the 
ongoing warmer trend into the weekend.

Short wave ridging noted on water vapor imagery today has continued 
to provide quiet conditions as main storm track remains confined 
well north of the area across south central Canada. Pronounced 
westerly flow regime in relatively low amplitude mid/upper level 
pattern will allow for continued broad low level warm advection 
tonight. This warm advection combined with maintenance of fairly 
strong gradient will result in much warmer temperatures tonight 
for min temps. Dry airmass across the area will help some with 
cooling this evening, but expecting maintenance of stronger 
gradient and warm advection to overwhelm and allow for much warmer
min temps from the upper 40s to around 50.

In terms of fire weather, large sfc dew point depressions have 
developed this afternoon, with largest depressions across southern 
portions of the forecast area across northern Indiana where relative 
humidities have dropped to between 20 and 30 percent this afternoon. 
10 hour fuel moistures also appear to have dried substantially, and 
some concerns for nudging up against red flag warning conditions 
over next few hours. Will continue with SPS handling of this 
situation with main focus for elevated fire weather danger along 
and south of the US 30 corridor through early evening.

The warming trend will continue tomorrow as broad southwesterly low 
level flow continues. A bit tricky in terms of temperature forecast 
tomorrow as source region for upstream airmass may be a bit 
different for different portions of the forecast area. Locations 
across NW Indiana/SW Lower Michigan will likely see source region 
from Central Plains into west central Illinois, while areas across 
far northeast Indiana/NW Ohio may have some influence of more 
southerly trajectories with slightly cooler pocket of low level air 
advecting up from the Ohio Valley.  Overall, fairly deep mixing and 
warming trend to low level temps over past 24 hours should allow for 
several degrees of warming for tomorrow, with high possibly pushing 
into the upper 70s across the west. Not expecting fire weather 
concerns to be as notable for tomorrow as the warmer air should be 
accompanied by some recovery in dew points. Gusty south winds are 
expected again on Saturday however.

&&

.LONG TERM...(Saturday Night through Friday)
Issued at 350 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Overall not much has changed forecast-wise for the long term period, 
with the above normal temperatures continuing for 2nd half of 
weekend through Tuesday before next system approaches the area later 
Tuesday into the middle of the week.

Subtropical jet-induced upper level short wave should slowly kick 
northeast out of the southern Plains late weekend into early Monday 
with warm-frontal like forcing lifting from south to north across 
the area. Some better elevated moisture return later Sunday with 
this feature would promote a few light showers or sprinkles but will 
continue to limit this mention to just some low PoPs across the 
northwest, as these locations appear inline to be best clipped by
better moisture transport ahead of the lead short wave.

The more impressive feature continues to be the amplification of the
large scale upper level trough in response to a strong eastern 
Pacific jet digging across western CONUS. While there is good 
agreement in this system impacting the area for the middle of next
week, there are still some large discrepancies in timing and 
amplitude with EC still representing fast envelope of solutions 
when compared to GFS/GEM. Respective ensemble solutions of 
individual models largely support their deterministic ideas with 
timing. Will hedge toward the slower/stronger envelope, but still 
some lower confidence in exact timing for the middle of the week. 
Given this, will keep PoPs in high chance category, but additional
increases in PoPs will be likely as confidence in timing increases
over next few forecast cycles.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday Evening)
Issued at 635 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Very limited moisture will help allow VFR conditions to prevail
through the TAF period with skies virtually free of clouds and 
atmospheric lower levels too dry to support any fog or low clouds.
The latest NAM BUFKIT shows the LLWS shear forecast has waned at 
SBN but still depicts some support at FWA, so have adjusted TAFs 
accordingly. Otherwise, as with Friday, some diurnal mixing of 
higher momentum air with daytime heating will support gusty 
daytime winds to around 22 kts.

&&

.IWX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IN...NONE.
MI...NONE.
OH...NONE.
LM...Small Craft Advisory until 2 AM EDT Saturday for LMZ043-046.

     Small Craft Advisory from 10 AM to 8 PM EDT Saturday for LMZ043-
     046.

&&

$$

SYNOPSIS...Marsili
SHORT TERM...Marsili
LONG TERM...Marsili
AVIATION...Skipper


Visit us at www.weather.gov/iwx

Follow us on Facebook...Twitter...and YouTube at:
www.facebook.com/NWSNorthernIndiana
www.twitter.com/nwsiwx
www.youtube.com/NWSNorthernIndiana
