FXUS63 KIND 212246
AFDIND

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Indianapolis IN
646 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...Updated Aviation Discussion...

.Short Term...(This evening through Saturday)
Issued at 249 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

On the synoptic scale a split flow pattern will persist through the 
short term period. Low-amplitude shortwave ridging is passing 
through today, resulting in strengthening low-level flow and 
eastward movement of positive 2-m temperature anomalies into the 
area. Today and tomorrow we will be around 10 degrees above normal 
for mid/late October. 

Pacific moisture cresting the aforementioned ridge and associated 
cirrus will mostly push east of the area later today, but may 
increase again tomorrow due to a weak upstream shortwave 
perturbation. Mountain-forced cirrus is already seen early this 
afternoon just east of the Rockies in response to this minor wave, 
and this should be carried eastward toward our area within 
westerlies aloft. Split flow, and large area of negative 
precipitable water anomalies well into the gulf will limit moisture 
return and ensure a precipitation-free period. 

See fire weather section for details on elevated to briefly critical 
fire weather this afternoon.

&&

.Long Term...(Saturday night through Friday)
Issued at 249 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

* Well above normal temperatures continue through early next week

* Next chance for measurable rainfall Tuesday - Wednesday 

.Synopsis...

Deepening trough across the Pacific Northwest dives south and phases 
with the subtropical jet over the Front Range region this weekend. 
Deep troughing pushes into the Central Plains while ridging builds 
into the Midwest and Great Lakes through early next week. The main 
upper energy pushes into Canada by mid next week while a piece of 
energy breaks off and forms a closed upper low at the base of the 
trough in the Southern Plains Tuesday. The closed low and associated 
surface feature then pull northeast through the Ohio Valley. 
Southwest flow pattern sets up behind the departing system as the 
next trough develops in the Southwest/Southern Plains for the end of 
next week. 

At the surface, high pressure remains over the Northeast while lower 
pressure develops in the Northern Plains this weekend through 
Tuesday. As the main energy pushes into Canada on Tuesday, the 
associated surface low also moves well north towards the Hudson Bay 
while a cold front extends southward into the Southern Plains where 
a secondary surface low develops. This surface low then pushes 
northeast through the Ohio Valley with high pressure building in 
behind it. 

.Saturday Night - Monday...

Southerly return flow continues to advect a seasonably warm airmass 
northward into the region this weekend through early next week as 
noted with 500mb heights rising above 580 and 850mb temperatures as 
high as 11 - 13C. This airmass supports highs in the mid to upper 
70s with a few spots potentially hitting the 80 degree mark. 
Forecast soundings indicate deep mixing heights up to around 5 kft 
indicating the potential for stronger winds aloft to mix down to the 
surface as well as drier air. While southerly flow will bring moist 
Gulf air northward, deterministic guidance and ensembles show the 
best moisture transport located just to the west of Indiana with PW 
around 1.25 inches over MO/IA and only around 0.75-1.00 inches 
locally. While RH values won't be nearly as low as this past week, 
drier air mixing down to the surface may result in min RH values in 
the 30s both Sunday and Monday afternoon. Winds will likely follow a 
diurnal trend as well with gusts during peak heating of the day up 
to 15-20 kts and a relative minimum in wind gusts/speeds overnight. 

As lower pressure and deep troughing approach the region, expect 
broad isentropic lift to increase in the expansive warm sector. On 
Monday, expect increasing clouds, especially during the afternoon as 
upper level moisture increases and weak isentropic results in cloud 
development. This may limit high temperatures by a few degrees; 
however strong warm air advection may be able to overcome increasing 
clouds. Therefore, highs in the mid to upper 70s appear likely once 
again Monday. 

.Tuesday - Wednesday...

* Next storm system to bring rainfall and possible thunderstorms

Active weather pattern expected mid next week with the next chance 
for measurable precipitation across Indiana. While most of the 
energy both at the surface and aloft from the aforementioned trough 
race off into Canada by Tuesday, a secondary stacked low pressure 
system develops at the base of the departing front/southern end of 
the cold front. This developing low keeps southerly flow and 
warm/moist air advection ongoing through the region with PW rising 
above 1.00 inch through Wednesday. 

Lower confidence exists with the track of this low as both GFS and 
ECMWF deterministic runs and ensemble members have timing and 
placement issues Tuesday through Wednesday. While a track through 
the Ohio Valley and possibly through Indiana is probable, there are 
still other ensemble members and the NBM which place the low further 
north. While low confidence exists for portions of the forecast, 
high confidence exists regarding measurable precipitation for much 
of the region along with above normal temperatures through Tuesday. 

Severe weather potential at the moment looks relatively low with 
such a dry airmass in place across the Ohio Valley. Even with strong 
warm and moist air advection for multiple days, latest guidance 
shows dew points only in the 50s as the system approaches Tuesday 
evening through Wednesday. Depending on the track of the surface and 
upper low, this could end up being a high shear, low CAPE type of 
event. QPF also is very dependent on the track of the low which 
could dictate where areas of heavier rainfall and thunderstorms set 
up. Confidence remains low on exact details and parameters this far 
out, but should increase as better sampling of the initial trough 
and subtropical jet occur later this weekend as they both track into 
the CONUS. For now expect cloudy and warm conditions Tuesday with 
rainfall moving into the region Tuesday night.

.Latter half of next week...

After the passage of the midweek system, expect a period of more 
benign conditions as weak ridging builds in ahead of a potential 
developing system across the Southwest. Longer range guidance 
indicates temperatures closer to climatological norms for late 
October. The overall pattern as of late has favored drier 
conditions, so confidence is higher in drier weather setting up for 
this period. Longer range guidance hints at another system 
approaching the region by late week into next week, but confidence 
on timing/track/placement is very low at this point. Therefore, 
trending toward near normal temperatures and a drier forecast with 
PoPs capped around 30 percent for now.

&&

.Aviation...(00Z TAF Issuance)
Issued at 646 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Impacts:

* Wind gusts to 25 knots Saturday afternoon. 

* Non-convective low level wind shear for a period overnight.

Discussion: 

VFR conditions will continue through the period, with mainly high 
clouds expected. Winds will diminish some by early in the period as 
mixing ends, but they will become gusty to 25kt again Saturday 
afternoon.

Winds aloft will remain up through the night, and this will cause a 
period of low level wind shear overnight.

&&

.Fire Weather...
Elevated to briefly critical fire weather conditions are expected 
through the afternoon. Latest WFAS 10-hour fuel moisture 
observations indicate 7% or less, indicating that fuels are 
receptive to fire. MSLP gradient and mixing is supporting 12-18 mph 
sustain winds (strongest across northern portions of the area). We 
have lowered RH across the area this afternoon closer to hi-res 
models, given typical moist bias of a model blended process. Some 
areas will briefly reach critical thresholds, particularly across 
the northern half of central Indiana where winds will be stronger. 
We have a Special Weather Statement highlighting the fire danger 
through late afternoon, and continue to message avoiding open 
burning or activities that cause sparks due to the increased threat 
of initial attack-type fires that could easily spread more rapidly 
than normal.

&&

.IND WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$

Short Term...BRB
Long Term...CM
Aviation...50
Fire Weather...BRB
