FXUS63 KBIS 232001
AFDBIS

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Bismarck ND
301 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This Evening through Monday)
Issued at 300 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A strong low pressure system will impact the region tonight through 
Monday. Concerns with this system include:

-The first accumulating snow of the season for much of western North 
Dakota;
-Strong northwesterly winds during and after precipitation;
-A chance of thunderstorms across central and eastern North Dakota 
tonight, a few of which could be strong to severe;
-Low probabilities for a higher-impact winter weather event in 
northwest North Dakota.

A closed upper low sits over the Northern Rockies early this 
afternoon. Downstream surface cyclogenesis has already commenced 
over north central Nebraska into south central South Dakota. 
Precipitation for most of the day thus far has been kept west of the 
ND/MT border due to mid level dry air advection. There is a stark 
contrast in temperatures across the state early this afternoon, with 
lower 40s in the northwest increasing the lower 70s southeast. 
Dewpoints in southeast North Dakota have also increased into the 50s.

The surface cyclone will track north-northeast into eastern North 
Dakota tonight as the upper low pivots into the Northern High 
Plains. Strong synoptic scale forcing will overcome the dryer mid 
level air, resulting in widespread precipitation developing across 
western and central North Dakota over the course of the evening, 
with probabilities increasing from east to west. Precipitation over 
central North Dakota will have more of a showery nature to it while 
the west experiences more of a stratiform deformation band, but with 
potential for some embedded convective elements.

The main concern through tonight for central North Dakota is a 
chance of thunderstorms given steep mid level lapse rates and 
forecast MUCAPE around 500-1000 J/kg. Forecast effective bulk shear 
appears to be sufficient for strong convection, but could be locally 
decreased near the mid to upper low circulation. The main expected 
hazard is hail, but a rogue severe gust cannot be ruled out given 0-
3 km shear around 30-40 kts. There is also a conditional tornado 
threat that will be highly dependent on the degree of MLCIN, which 
will be determined by how well dynamical BL mixing is maintained 
after the loss of solar insolation. Forecast low-level shear and 
vorticity fields are beyond sufficient for near-surface rotation. 
The greatest risk of severe weather is across the James River Valley 
and points east, where some CAMs are depicting a west-east oriented 
line of low-topped supercells tracking north-northwest later this 
evening into the early overnight hours.

The main concern for western North Dakota is rain transitioning to 
snow tonight into Monday morning. The transition will be primarily 
driven by surface temperatures falling below freezing due to dynamic 
cooling and low level cold air advection, but there are hints that 
warmer temperatures aloft could promote a transition zone containing 
sleet as a dominant type. The probability of liquid hydrometeors 
reaching the surface at sub-freezing temperatures is low. While some 
icing cannot be ruled out on elevated objects, freezing rain is not 
expected to be a primary driver of impacts for this event.

Snowfall rates and residence time thereof is a major concern, and 
remains the most uncertain aspect of the forecast. Several 
ingredients to support enhanced snowfall rates appear present, 
including strong low level frontogenesis and conditional instability 
combined with strong lift residing in the dendritic growth zone. 
HREF hourly snowfall rate guidance confirms this potential, with 
ensemble mean rates approaching 1 inch/hour. Knowing this 
information, the main questions then become where will the most 
favorable ingredients for heavy snow overlap, how widespread that 
overlap will be, and how long it will last. It is worth pointing out 
there are key differences among different ensemble systems: the GEFS 
produces much higher probabilities for significant snow 
accumulations than the ECMWF. The HREF probabilities for significant 
snow are more in line with GEFS, but are more spatially inconsistent 
due to few ensemble members and finer model resolution. Our 
confidence is increasing that some parts of northwest and possibly 
west central North Dakota will see warning criteria impacts from a 
combination of heavy snow and wind (more on the wind threat below), 
but areal confidence remains low and precludes us from upgrading any 
counties to a warning at this time. The only change to the Winter 
Weather Advisory for this forecast package was to add Mountrail 
County.

As mentioned above, gradient driven winds will be a concern, with 
sustained speeds around 30 mph and gusts near 50 mph across much of 
western and central North Dakota late tonight through Monday 
afternoon. The Wind Advisory has been expanded to the east and 
extended in time through the afternoon. Counties under a Winter 
Weather Advisory Monday morning have also been placed in a Wind 
Advisory for Monday afternoon.

Much of central North Dakota will observe daytime highs in the 40s 
early Monday morning, with temperatures falling into the 30s by the 
afternoon. Western North Dakota will start out the day in the mid to 
upper 20s and only see around 5 to 10 degrees of warming at most. 
Precipitation is expected to gradually wind down Monday afternoon.
Some rain could mix back in with the snow as rates become lighter 
and temperatures rise slightly above freezing.

.LONG TERM...(Monday Night through Sunday)
Issued at 300 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A secondary shortwave following the strong low pressure system could 
bring some light snow along the international border early Tuesday 
morning, with little to no accumulation expected at this time. 
Transitory ridging later Tuesday into Wednesday then looks to be 
followed by another shortwave Wednesday night into Thursday. Chances 
for precipitation with this system are only around 20 to 40 percent 
at this timed, and limited to southern and eastern portions of the 
state. Ensemble guidance is then tilted toward a mean quasi-zonal 
flow heading into next weekend, possibly with a slight southwesterly 
component. Temperature anomalies trend from slightly below normal 
early in the week to above normal next weekend, though it should be 
noted that normal temperatures are consistently decreasing at this 
time of year. A quick glance at NBM temperature guidance confirms a 
subtle warming trend is possible through the long term period. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 1257 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

IFR/MVFR ceilings are likely to prevail at KDIK, KXWA, and KMOT
for most of the forecast period. MVFR ceilings will also approach
KBIS later tonight and KJMS early Monday morning. A strong low
pressure system will bring mixed precipitation, strong winds, and
a few thunderstorms to the region this evening through Monday
morning. Chances for thunderstorms are greatest at KBIS and KJMS.
The strongest storms could produce small hail. Rain will change
over to snow from west to east tonight into Monday morning at all
terminals except KJMS. The transition period may include a mix of
rain, snow, and sleet. Expect MVFR to IFR visibility with rain,
and IFR to LIFR visibility with wintry precipitation. Blowing snow
could also impact western North Dakota Monday morning. Gusty 
northeast winds this afternoon will turn northwesterly overnight 
and increase to around 25 kts, with gusts near 40 kts. The center 
of the low will pass near KJMS later this evening, which may cause
a brief period of low level wind shear concerns.


&&

.BIS WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Weather Advisory from 1 AM to 1 PM CDT Monday for NDZ001-
002-009-010-017-018-031>033-040-041-043-044.

Wind Advisory from 1 PM to 7 PM CDT Monday for NDZ001-002-009-
010-017-018-031>033-040-041-043-044.

Wind Advisory from 1 AM to 7 PM CDT Monday for NDZ003>005-
011>013-019>023-025-034>037-042-045>048-050-051.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...Hollan
LONG TERM...Hollan
AVIATION...Hollan
