FXUS63 KBIS 231757
AFDBIS

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Bismarck ND
1257 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1257 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The near-term forecast remains on track. Attention remains focused
on evaluating the impactful weather arriving this evening.

UPDATE Issued at 943 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The latest NBM guidance was blended into the forecast for this
update. This did not result in any significant changes to forecast
messaging and thinking. An examination of deterministic and 
ensemble model data initialized over the past 12 hours reveals 
there is still a potential for an area of +6 inches of snow 
somewhere across western North Dakota, but confidence on exactly 
where and how widespread those higher amounts could occur remains 
low. HRRR soundings across western North Dakota do show very 
strong forcing and conditional instability residing within the 
dendritic growth zone, and the 00Z HREF ensemble mean hourly 
snowfall rates exceed 1 inch in some areas. 

Recent ensemble guidance also maintains notable probabilities for
freezing rain and light ice accumulations on elevated objects. 
However, forecast soundings combined with the conceptual model 
suggest this is a much lower probability outcome that would not 
produce impacts beyond what is already anticipated.

UPDATE Issued at 554 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The forecast generally looks to be on track this morning. Radar
echoes have become a bit more pronounced across the northwest and
while there won't be much rainfall from this activity, there have
been some observations here and there showing some drops making 
it to the ground. No major changes were needed. Just blended in
the latest observations to the going forecast.  

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Monday)
Issued at 344 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Increasing precipitation chances, gusty winds, and accumulating 
snowfall potential west highlights the short term forecast period.

Western and central North Dakota will be under the influence of 
southwest flow aloft as a mid level trough continues to dig closer, 
eventually closing off over Wyoming and Montana late today. At the 
surface, a low will continue to deepen to the lee of the Northern
Rockies over eastern Wyoming. This low will eventually move into 
northeastern South Dakota by this evening and to the North 
Dakota/Minnesota/Manitoba border area by early Monday afternoon. 

A deformation band of precipitation has started to form over eastern 
Montana in the general vicinity of an elongated 700mb low and this 
batch of rain should slowly drift towards the North Dakota border 
through the day, although model trends have been for this 
precipitation to stay to our west through most of the day. Thus, the 
latest iterations of NBM precipitation chances hold off higher 
probabilities now until late this afternoon across the far west. 
This seems to be reasonable given CAM trends and current 
observations. 

Late this afternoon and into tonight, heavier precipitation will 
finally start to move in with winds also ramping up as the pressure 
gradient increases. There should be two separate areas of heavier 
precipitation. One will be across the warm sector (portions of the 
central and east), where showery activity and thunderstorms are 
expected to develop. The other will be further west across the 
deformation zone where the strongest synoptic forcing and best 
frontogenesis overlap should reside. 

The most favorable conditions for severe thunderstorms will 
likely be found well to our east but RAP soundings are suggesting 
MUCAPE values in the 500 to 1000 J/kg range across most of the 
central and east tonight and into Monday morning, collocated with 
deep layer shear in the 25 to 35 knot range. The best shear and 
instability overlap will be in the James River Valley, Devil's 
Lake Basin, and up into the Turtle Mountains. This will be the 
favored area for a strong storm or two with small hail being the 
main threat.

Now, moving onto the snow riffraff. After 00z tonight, strong 
cold air advection will begin to filter in behind the low and rain
will transition to a wintry mix of rain, possibly some sleet, and
snow. Across the west, this precipitation should change over to 
all snow and then a mix may move into the central. Snow 
accumulations continue to look generally light, but we should 
still see widespread totals across the west in the 2 to 5 inch 
range with locally higher amounts possible. As we move into 
portions of the central, expect just a trace (if any) to an inch 
or so. Given the accumulations forecast in the west, the forecast 
for some areas of blowing snow in falling snow, and the fact that 
this is the first widespread accumulating snow of the season - we 
went ahead and decided to issue a Winter Weather Advisory for snow
and blowing snow generally across our western two tiers of 
counties (06z Monday through 18z Monday).

We also decided to go ahead and issue a Wind Advisory for points 
further east where we are still likely to see some sustained winds 
to 30 mph and gusts to 45 mph, but without as much snowfall. 

Finally, there will be quite a gradient west to east in high
temperatures today as this system moves in. Points across the west
and north will only see highs in the mid to upper 40s, while areas
over portions of the central and the southeast will see highs in 
the mid 60s to lower 70s. Expect much colder temperatures on the 
back side with lows tonight in the mid 20s west to the mid to 
upper 30s east. Monday's highs will be chilly with highs only in 
the mid 30s to mid 40s. These temperatures and the strong winds 
will lead to some apparent temperatures in the upper single digits
and low to mid teens across the west and portions of the central 
Monday morning. Basically, Monday is shaping up to be a fairly 
gross day but the moisture will be welcome. 

.LONG TERM...(Monday Night through Saturday)
Issued at 344 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The upper low will move well off into Ontario by Monday night with
precipitation chances also moving out of the area. The flow will
quickly deamplify, putting us back into near zonal flow aloft. 

A compact mid-level wave will move through early Tuesday, 
bringing a slight chance of light snow to the north. For the rest 
of the long term, the flow remains fairly progressive with a weak 
wave or two moving through Wednesday night through Thursday,
bringing another brief shot of light rain and/or snow. 

After Monday, temperatures will gradually warm back into the 50s
through the week.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday Afternoon)
Issued at 1257 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

IFR/MVFR ceilings are likely to prevail at KDIK, KXWA, and KMOT
for most of the forecast period. MVFR ceilings will also approach
KBIS later tonight and KJMS early Monday morning. A strong low
pressure system will bring mixed precipitation, strong winds, and
a few thunderstorms to the region this evening through Monday
morning. Chances for thunderstorms are greatest at KBIS and KJMS.
The strongest storms could produce small hail. Rain will change
over to snow from west to east tonight into Monday morning at all
terminals except KJMS. The transition period may include a mix of
rain, snow, and sleet. Expect MVFR to IFR visibility with rain,
and IFR to LIFR visibility with wintry precipitation. Blowing snow
could also impact western North Dakota Monday morning. Gusty 
northeast winds this afternoon will turn northwesterly overnight 
and increase to around 25 kts, with gusts near 40 kts. The center 
of the low will pass near KJMS later this evening, which may cause
a brief period of low level wind shear concerns.

&&

.BIS WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Weather Advisory from 1 AM to 1 PM CDT Monday for NDZ001-
002-009-017-018-031>033-040-041-043-044.

Wind Advisory from 1 AM to 4 PM CDT Monday for NDZ003-010>012-
019>022-034>036-042-045>047-050.

&&

$$

UPDATE...Hollan
SHORT TERM...ZH
LONG TERM...ZH
AVIATION...Hollan
