FXUS63 KFGF 231727
AFDFGF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Grand Forks ND
1227 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 640 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Adjusted cloud cover for more clearing than expected this morning
across all but the far northwestern counties. Made a few tweaks to
precip timing as it comes in later this afternoon and evening. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Monday night)
Issued at 403 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Precipitation strength and amounts will be the main challenges for
the period.

Strong upper trough digging into the western CONUS, with surface
low pressure over northeastern CO/western Neb and a warm front
extending into our southern counties. Currently temps right along
the warm front are fairly cool in the upper 30s thanks to light
winds and less cloud cover, but expecting temps to quickly rise
this morning in southeastern ND and west central MN. By this
afternoon, the warm front is expected to have lifted into our
northern CWA, with much of the Red River Valley and western MN in
the upper 60s and even low 70s. Devils Lake Basin will be on the
cool side of the boundary and stay mostly in the 50s. The bulk of
the day will be fairly quiet with increasing southeast to
northeast winds. By tonight, the upper low starts to move out into
the Dakotas, with the surface low center tracking right over the
Red River Valley.

There will be plenty of strong upper forcing during the overnight
period, and although deep layer bulk shear is around 35 kts the
low level shear will be very high as the low tracks overhead. The
main question will be instability. The NAM tries to bring some dew
points over 60 degrees into west central MN. Considering the
closest 60 dew points are currently in TX, think this might be
overdone and leaned more towards the NBM's mid to upper 50s. Even
the lower moisture amounts should bring some elevated instability
as the low lifts northeastward this evening, and the HREF even has
some 50 to 60 percent probabilities of some surface based CAPE
over 500 J/kg. Updraft helicity tracks from the HREF are not 
hugely numerous, but a few paintballs for strong storms are there.
Could see a few storms bringing some severe hail. Tornadoes and 
severe winds are less likely due to the mostly elevated nature of 
the storms, but with the surface low and frontal boundaries in the
area they are not completely out of the question. 

By Monday, the upper low will be lifting off into Ontario, with
the surface low quickly following. Current runs of most of the
ensemble members put the main deformation zone with the low
further west, giving more of our counties the dry slot. Devils
Lake basin still looks to get the most precipitation, but chances
for over an inch are less. Cold front will be coming through on
Monday, but temps will be very warm ahead of it. A few flakes
possible mixing in as the precip tapers off Monday night, but at
this point think any accumulating snow will remain to our west.
Strong cold air advection behind the front should help drop temps
Monday night back below the freezing mark, but mainly after precip
has ended.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Saturday) 
Issued at 403 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

There is a low chance (less than 10%) for seeing widespread 
impacts from hazardous weather. The upper level flow is expected 
to turn generally zonal upstream of a quasi-blocking upper ridge 
over Quebec and the eastern Canadian maritime. Further upstream, 
an upper jet takes aim at the Pac NW ejecting one or more mid 
level troughs into central CONUS/CAN around mid week. However a 
lack of overall moisture content and generally weak forcing for 
ascent will limit the amount and coverage of any associated 
precip.

Seasonably cool air mass behind Monday's exiting Colorado Low will 
help push minimum temps into the 20s starting Tuesday. An ejecting 
s/w trough out of the Pac NW moves into the central CONUS around Wed-
Thu continuing the feed of cooler, slightly less than average temps. 
Most ensemble guidance splits this energy into two streams, with the 
Northern Plains/Upper Midwest between the mitotic energies. This 
will still bring chances for precip in the form of both light rain 
and/or snow, dependent upon time of day forcing moves through. As of 
now Thursday holds the best chance for seeing light precip. This 
would also bring a period of breezy winds around Wed-Thu.

Getting into late next week, most guidance reintroduces a flattening 
ridge over our region within the zonal flow. This should help push 
temps toward a slight warming trend, with temps at least getting 
closer toward normal, while likely keeping conditions mostly dry 
into the weekend.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1218 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions prevail at all sites through the early evening.
KDVL will see MVFR ceilings starting around sunset as showers and
isolated thunderstorms push into the area in association with an
upper low. A warm front traverses the area through the overnight 
hours and into Monday, bringing more widespread shower and 
thunderstorm activity to all sites, mainly after midnight. MVFR to
IFR ceilings are possible during periods of heavier rain. LLWS 
will be an impact at all sites from midnight onward through around
sunrise Monday morning.


&&

.FGF WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
ND...None.
MN...None.
&&

$$

UPDATE...JR
SHORT TERM...JR
LONG TERM...CJ
AVIATION...Lynch
