FXUS63 KFGF 232040
AFDFGF

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Grand Forks ND
340 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday night)
Issued at 338 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Impacts through the remainder of today revolve around the timing of 
thunderstorms this evening. A rather deep H5 upper low continues to 
strengthen over the central Rockies this afternoon, providing an 
environment supported of strong warm air advection into the Northern 
Plains and Upper Midwest. Temperatures in the Red River Valley have 
climbed into record territory this afternoon, with low to mid 70s 
fairly widespread across the area. Dew points are approaching the 
mid-50s in west-central Minnesota, with the expectation that these 
higher dew points continue working further north and west through 
this evening. 

Thunderstorm activity is expected across the area starting late this 
evening and persisting through the overnight hours. A few strong to 
severe thunderstorms are possible, with very good low to mid-level 
shear, and modest CAPE. Deep layer shear is minimal; however, there 
should be enough support to allow the development of elevated 
clusters of thunderstorms. Severe thunderstorms that are able to 
form this evening could produce hail up to 1 inch and wind gusts to 
60 mph. A tornado or two is possible, especially during the late 
evening, with the risk slowly diminishing overnight. 

Rain is expected to mix with snow from midday Monday onward into the 
early evening. This will mainly occur in the Devils Lake Basin; 
however, light snow is possible as far east as the Red River Valley. 
Accumulations are generally not expected, with perhaps a light 
dusting on grassy or elevated areas.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Sunday)
Issued at 338 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Overview: Active but dry weather pattern for this forecast period. 
Best chance of precipitation is going to be Thursday after the low 
pressure system exits. Temperatures are going to stay fairly 
consistent with the high temperatures in the 50's with a couple days 
in 40's. The overnight temperatures will be in the mid 30's with a 
couple nights in the 20's.

Discussion: 
The Northern Hemispheric 300mb and 500mb level shows a semi-
progressive pattern with 4-5 waves depending how you count it.
Tuesday, A cold air mass is going move into our area following the
exit of the Colorado Low. Another transient low is moving along
the south maintaining zonal flow over North Dakota. The cold air
advection is expected to drop our temperatures into the mid 40's
and low 50's. Wednesday and Thursday has us in a southerly flow as
a weak ridge moves over the Dakotas. With a weak surface high
setup over the midwest the FA air will remain in cold air for
Wednesday keeping the temperatures in the 40's. Thursday
temperatures are going to be a little bit warmer as that surface
high moves out. An upper level shortwave will be primarily
responsible for any precipitation received. The atmosphere is
still dry aloft so the amounts will be relatively small.
Precipitation amounts of greater than 0.1 inches is 10-15% with
some areas in North Central having a 20% chance. With how dry the
atmosphere is forecasted only a couple hundredths is more likely
to be seen. Friday into the weekend, most guidance reintroduces a
flattening upper ridge over our region. The zonal flow should help
push temperatures toward a slight warming trend, with temps at
least getting closer toward normal, while likely keeping
conditions mostly dry into the weekend.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1218 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR conditions prevail at all sites through the early evening.
KDVL will see MVFR ceilings starting around sunset as showers and
isolated thunderstorms push into the area in association with an
upper low. A warm front traverses the area through the overnight 
hours and into Monday, bringing more widespread shower and 
thunderstorm activity to all sites, mainly after midnight. MVFR to
IFR ceilings are possible during periods of heavier rain. LLWS 
will be an impact at all sites from midnight onward through around
sunrise Monday morning.

&&

.FGF WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
ND...Wind Advisory from 10 AM to 7 PM CDT Monday for NDZ006>008-
     014>016-024-026>030-038-054.

MN...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...Lynch
LONG TERM...MM
AVIATION...Lynch
