FXUS63 KLMK 220152
AFDLMK

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Louisville KY
952 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.Forecast Update...
Issued at 952 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Current forecast remains on track this evening.  Mostly clear skies 
are expected overnight.  Though a few bands of high cirrus will work 
across the region.  Southeasterly winds will remain slightly 
elevated overnight which will keep overnight lows up.  Coolest 
readings will be out in our eastern valleys where lows in the upper 
30s to the lower 40s are expected.  Elsewhere, upper 40s to lower 
50s for overnight lows still look good.

&&

.Short Term...(This evening through Saturday)
Issued at 300 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...Elevated Fire Weather Conditions Persist...

Dry conditions continue this afternoon, with minimum relative 
humidity values down into the 20-30 % range across much of the area. 
Although dew points have risen into the 30s, temperatures are also 
notably warmer than yesterday, which is still keeping relative 
humidities pretty low. Winds are pretty similar to yesterday, if 
only slightly weaker so an elevated fire danger will persist through 
afternoon and evening. Will keep the Special Weather Statement 
going, and will extend it into the weekend based on feedback from 
various fire weather partners, and collaboration with surrounding 
offices. 

As far as the typical sensible weather goes, we'll see temps peaking 
in the low to mid 70s this afternoon under mostly sunny skies. Temps 
drop off into the upper 40s and low 50s for most tonight, however 
some low to mid 40s are certainly possible in some of the cool 
eastern valleys that decouple. Saturday brings some more variable 
high clouds with even warmer temperatures pushing toward the 75 to 
80 degree range as low level thicknesses continue to rise. The 
continued moist advection in the low levels will make afternoon RH 
less of a concern through the weekend, but still could see some 
marginal burning conditions at times, especially as small and medium 
fuel continue to dry out with worsening drought conditions. Outdoor 
burning is not recommended. Follow local burn bans.

.Long Term...(Saturday night through Friday)
Issued at 305 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Sunday - Monday...

An upper level trough is forecast to progress across the Great Basin 
on Sunday and then swing out across the Plains early next week. A 
downstream upper level ridge will amplify over the Ohio Valley. 
Strong cyclogenesis is likely across the Plains during this time, 
with anomalous SW low-level jetting across the Plains and Midwest. 
Though the strongest southerly flow will remain west of the area 
through Monday, temperatures will continue to climb. Highs in the 
mid 70s to around 80 look likely for Sunday, with upper 70s to lower 
80s on Monday. Overnight lows in the 40s and 50s will be common. 

Tuesday and Beyond...

Monday night and beyond, a north-south oriented cold front will push 
across the Mississippi River Valley and possibly approach the 
western CWA as early as Tuesday. Potent mid-level shortwave energy 
is forecast to eject northeast from the southern Plains across the 
Ohio Valley, helping to develop a secondary sfc low along the front 
over the region as it passes. Certainly a dynamic system with strong 
wind fields and favorable deep-layer shear. Rain showers and 
thunderstorms will be possible along and ahead of the front Tuesday 
into Wednesday. The strength of any convection remains very 
uncertain and will depend on available instability. The timing of 
the frontal passage also remains uncertain, but Tuesday evening into 
Tuesday night appears the most likely window at this time.

Temperatures will remain above normal into Tuesday and will then 
cool off to closer to normal for the end of the work week behind the 
front.

&&

.Aviation...(00Z TAF Issuance)
Issued at 701 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

IMPACTS:
 - Gusty winds Saturday afternoon

DISCUSSION:

VFR conditions are expected through the upcoming TAF period. 
Southerly winds of 5-8kts will be seen overnight at the terminals. 
Look for winds to increase by mid-late morning while shifting to the 
south-southwest.  Sustained speeds of 10-15kts with gusts to 20-
22kts will be possible through sunset Saturday.  Cloud cover through 
the period will be scattered-broken high cirrus.

CONFIDENCE:

High on all elements.


&&

.LMK WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IN...None.
KY...None.
&&

$$

Update...MJ
Short Term...BJS
Long Term....EBW
Aviation.....MJ
