FXUS63 KJKL 212334
AFDJKL

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Jackson KY
734 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 641 PM EDT FRI OCT 21 2022

Lowered minimum temperatures a few degrees in many of the 
sheltered valleys, particularly over the Big Sandy River Basin. 
Given the crossover temperatures still below 32F, expect good 
radiative cooling to near freezing overnight. Radiative losses may
be tempered slightly by some passing high clouds and a little bit
of a pressure gradient. Look for a seasonably cool night with 
minimum temperatures in the lower 30s in the coldest sheltered 
northeast hollows up to the upper 40s over thermal belt ridges. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Saturday night)
Issued at 329 PM EDT FRI OCT 21 2022

Present surface analysis has an elongated surface 1023mb high 
pressure center situated along the eastern seaboard. However, aloft 
a moisture starved trough is working its way through the flow. Only 
indication of the trough is the increased surface winds and the 
cirrus clouds crossing through the region.

The trough will eject to the east overnight and upper-level zonal 
flow will take over at the main regime. At the lower levels, 
southwesterly flow will dominate through the day Saturday. The 
southwesterly flow will advect warmer and drier air into the region. 
As a result, fire weather SPSs will likely be issued again overnight 
for Saturday and probably again Sunday. This has been a struggle as 
models want to advect higher Gulf moisture but the current airmass 
over the South is drier than the air mass currently over the 
Bluegrass State. Therefore, went with the 10th percentile NBM to get 
the lowest possible Tds for tomorrow and Sunday. Otherwise, the 
story stays the same through the period. Above average temperatures 
will remain in place with abnormally dry weather through the 
weekend. 

.LONG TERM...(Sunday through Friday)
Issued at 401 PM EDT FRI OCT 21 2022

Key messages:

* Warm and continued dry weather dominates through early next 
  week.

* A passing cold front brings a chance of rainfall by mid-week.

The models are in general agreement with an amplified pattern to
be in place across the CONUS through next week. A positively
tilted split-flow trough will be aligned from the northern Great
Basin down through the eastern Pacific initially. This trough will
gradually shift east into early next week, with model differences
continuing to abound, particularly in timing. Overall, a slower 
approach still seems appropriate, given the general ensemble
trends in the evolution of the southern stream portion of the
trough. A cutoff low will develop near the Four Corners region, 
before dipping into the southern Plains, and then moving northeast
through the lower Mississippi Valley and eventually into the Ohio
Valley. At the surface, a cold front will take aim at the region 
late Tuesday through Wednesday, before moving out by Wednesday 
evening. Again, there is not good agreement regarding surface low 
development along the boundary as it approaches our area; however,
QPF continues to generally trend downward overall with this 
system unfortunately. 

Above normal temperatures, lower afternoon relative humidity, and
persistent ridge/valley splits will be on tap through Tuesday.
Highs will average in the mid 70s, with lows gradually moderating
from the low to mid 40s in the eastern valleys, while ridges stay
up in the low to mid 50s. Given the drier column remaining in
place, have favored dew points lower than the 10th percentile of
the blended guidance during the late morning and afternoon hours
each day from Sunday through Tuesday. PoP chances increase 
Tuesday night into Wednesday, as a most likely sheared out cold 
front approaches and eventually crosses the area. High pressure 
and short wave ridging aloft allow for a return of dry weather 
Thursday through Friday, with temperatures easing back closer to 
seasonal normals.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
ISSUED AT 733 PM EDT FRI OCT 21 2022

VFR conditions currently exist across all terminals and will 
continue to prevail through the entire TAF period. A few wispy
high clouds will pass at times but will be of no consequence. 
Light variable winds tonight will pick back up out of the south 
southwest at 5 to 7 kts after 15z Saturday.

&&

.JKL WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NONE.
&&

$$

UPDATE...GEERTSON
SHORT TERM...VORST
LONG TERM...GEOGERIAN
AVIATION...GEERTSON/VORST
