FXUS61 KAKQ 212354
AFDAKQ

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Wakefield VA
754 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure lingers over the area tonight through early
Saturday. Developing coastal low pressure will bring some light
rain, especially at the coast Sunday through Sunday night. 
Clearing and mild behind the system for the first half of next 
week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM SATURDAY MORNING/...
As of 255 PM EDT Friday...

Latest analysis reveals ~1020mb sfc high pressure over the
Mid-Atlantic coast this afternoon. Aloft, a dampening upper
level trough is pushing across the area, and will push offshore
tonight. Due to PW values in the 0.25-0.50" range, little to no
clouds have been noted, with temperatures well into the 60s to
near 70 degrees under a mainly sunny sky.

Mainly clear tonight. Sfc high lifts off slightly to the north
into early Saturday, as coastal trough off the southeast coast 
develops a bit further. Could see some more patchy fog along the
coastal plain late tonight. Otherwise, mainly clear and still 
chilly but not as cold as the past few nights courtesy of light 
onshore flow. Lows in the mid to upper 30s inland, 40s to near 
50 along the coast under a mainly clear sky.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM SATURDAY MORNING THROUGH MONDAY/...
As of 255 PM EDT Friday...

A piece of the shortwave energy gets pinched off along the 
southeast coast late tonight, allowing for a weak UL low to 
deepen, enhancing the sfc coastal trough. Meanwhile, high 
pressure over New England continues to ridge south into the 
local area. Clouds gradually begin to increase from SE to NW 
Saturday midday into Sat night, but we will remain dry. Rising 
thicknesses should allow for warming trend to continue Sat 
despite the onshore flow. Look for highs in the upper 60s-low 
70s. 

Models continue to have different ideas with tracking weak
coastal low through the late weekend period and into Monday. 
12z/21 operational GFS and NAM want to keep the low offshore of
the GA/FL coast, while the CMC is a bit more aggressive in
pushing low pressure inland. The 12z/21 ECMWF and to a lesser
extent the CMC has finally started to bend toward the less
phased/weaker system idea. This would keep a majority of the QPF
offshore, with a weaker system in general. Regardless, it looks
like precip will sparse and more in the way of sct light showers
inland, with more persistent (though still light) rain limited 
to areas E of I-95, with best chances right along the coast. We 
have maintained high end PoP (40-50%) peaking Sunday morning- 
early afternoon. Precip should taper off Sunday night (over 
Eastern shore) as the low tracks NE and away from the local 
area. While lows will be warmer Sunday (mid 40s-upper 50s), 
highs will be cooler than previous days owing to breezy onshore
(E-NE flow). Look for highs in the low to mid 60s, with upper 
60s SE. Some very weak, albeit mainly elevated instability is 
possible along the SE VA/NE NC coast as the coastal trough 
lingers offshore of the northern OBX as it weakens. Did include 
slight chance thunder wording along the SE coast Sunday 
afternoon. 

High pressure begins to rebuild Monday, as a pattern-changing 
ridge builds in aloft. Will likely see some lingering clouds
into Monday and possible later Monday aftn as weak troughiness
lingers along the eastern seaboard into Monday night. Otherwise, 
sky gradually clears up Mon and Monday night. Lows in the low- 
mid 50s and highs around 70.

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 255 PM EDT Friday...

Deterministic models are still plagued by run to run consistency
issues. so have gone a bit more toward EPS/GEFS. This blend does
favor quickly moderating/warming temperatures with a mainly dry
frontal passage late next week. Temperatures behind that front
fall to near or just above climo. Highs Tue-Thu in the 70s, with
lows in the 50s.

&&

.AVIATION /00Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
As of 755 PM EDT Friday...

High pressure is centered over the region as of 00z. VFR under a
clear sky with a calm to very light E or SE wind. Shallow ground
fog is possible from about 08-12z at SBY, PHF, and ECG.
Otherwise, VFR with increasing high clouds Saturday aftn, and 
an E or NE wind increasing to 5-10kt (8-12kt ECG) later 
Saturday morning into the aftn.

Degraded flight conditions are possible with lower cigs and
spotty light rain (especially toward and along the coast) early
Sunday morning into Sunday and Sunday night due to a weak
coastal low. Gradually improving conditions are expected toward
the middle of next week as high pressure builds into the region.

&&

.MARINE...
As of 315 PM EDT Friday...

Winds this afternoon were light onshore around 5-7 kt, increasing to 
5-10 kt this evening. Waves were around 1 foot and seas were around 
2 ft. High pressure remains over the coast through Sat before 
shifting inland Sun. Meanwhile, a coastal trough offshore gradually 
organizes and moves closer to the coast this weekend. A sfc low 
develops along the trough off the SE coast, gradually approaching 
the coast Sun into Mon before moving out to sea. As a result winds 
become NE late tonight, increasing to 10-15 kt Sat, then increasing 
to 15-25 kt (with gusts to 30 kt over the coastal waters) Sat night 
through Sun. Winds become N 10-15 kt Sun night as the low moves NE 
away from the coast. As such have issued SCAs from 4 PM Sat to 6 AM 
Sun for the southern coastal waters and Currituck Sound, from 10 PM 
Sat through 6 AM Sun for the middle coastal waters and the mouth of 
the Ches Bay, and from 1 AM Sun through 6 AM Sun for the Ches Bay, 
Lower James, and northern coastal waters. Winds and seas/waves 
remain elevated through Sun evening with seas remaining elevated 
through Mon (6-8 ft). That being said, will need to extend SCAs 
(temporally) with future updates but will end them at the end of the 
fourth period for this update cycle (Sat night). High pressure moves 
back in behind the low early next week, but with the coastal trough 
lingering offshore, low confidence exists regarding any future lows 
developing along the trough and subsequent possible SCAs next
week.

&&

.AKQ WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MD...None.
NC...None.
VA...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory from 1 AM to 6 AM EDT Sunday for 
     ANZ630>632-638-650-652.
     Small Craft Advisory from 4 PM Saturday to 6 AM EDT Sunday for 
     ANZ633-656-658.
     Small Craft Advisory from 10 PM Saturday to 6 AM EDT Sunday 
     for ANZ634-654.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...MAM
NEAR TERM...MAM
SHORT TERM...MAM
LONG TERM...AM/MAM
AVIATION...AJZ/MAM
MARINE...RMM
