FLUS43 KDLH 232056
HWODLH

Hazardous Weather Outlook
National Weather Service Duluth MN
356 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

MNZ010>012-018>021-025-026-033>038-WIZ001>004-006>009-242100-
Koochiching-North St. Louis-Northern Cook/Northern Lake-
North Itasca-Central St. Louis-Southern Lake/North Shore-
Southern Cook/North Shore-North Cass-South Itasca-South Cass-
Crow Wing-Northern Aitkin-South Aitkin-Carlton/South St. Louis-
Pine-Douglas-Bayfield-Ashland-Iron-Burnett-Washburn-Sawyer-Price-
356 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

This Hazardous Weather Outlook is for portions of northeast
Minnesota and northwest Wisconsin.

.DAY ONE...This afternoon and Tonight

Gusty southeast winds of 40 to 45 MPH are possible this afternoon
and overnight across the Northland. Make sure to secure loose
objects that may blow around. 

A strong low pressure system will cause thunderstorms to occur 
tonight into Monday. Multiple rounds of thunderstorms are possible
and a few storms may become severe this evening and overnight. 
Main threats include large hail around an inch in diameter and 
damaging winds around 60 mph. There is also a small risk for a
tornado in Cass and Crow Wing Counties tonight. 

.DAYS TWO THROUGH SEVEN...Monday through Saturday

Isolated severe thunderstorms may be possible Monday morning in
far north-central Minnesota. Hazards on Monday morning include
damaging wind gusts around 60 MPH. Non-severe thunderstorms may
also be possible Monday morning in northwest Wisconsin. 

Southerly winds will gust to 30 to 35 mph on Monday for much of
the Northland. A few gusts may exceed 40 MPH late Monday morning 
into the afternoon. Make sure to secure loose objects that may 
blow around. 

.SPOTTER INFORMATION STATEMENT...

Skywarn spotters are encouraged to report hail of any size, rainfall
amounts, and wind damage to the National Weather Service.

$$

LSZ121-140>148-150-242100-
Bayfield to Oak Point WI-Grand Portage to Grand Marais MN-
Grand Marais to Taconite Harbor MN-
Taconite Harbor to Silver Bay Harbor MN-
Silver Bay Harbor to Two Harbors MN-Two Harbors to Duluth MN-
Duluth MN to Port Wing WI-Port Wing to Sand Island WI-
Sand Island to Bayfield WI-Oak Point to Saxon Harbor WI-
Outer Apostle Islands Beyond 5 NM from Mainland-
356 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

This Hazardous Weather Outlook is for portions of Lake Superior
and the Nearshore waters of western Lake Superior.

.DAY ONE...This afternoon and Tonight

Strong northeasterly winds will continue this afternoon. Expect
these gusty winds to veer to the southeast tonight. Waves and 
gusts will create hazardous conditions for small craft. Small 
Craft Advisories remain in effect through tonight. See the latest 
Marine Weather Message and Nearshore Marine Forecast for more 
information. Thunderstorms will be possible tonight into Monday 
morning. A few storms could be strong, capable of producing dime 
size hail and winds in excess of 40 knots.

.DAYS TWO THROUGH SEVEN...Monday through Saturday

Strong south to southwest winds are expected to develop on Monday,
creating conditions hazardous to smaller vessels. A Small Craft 
Advisory is in effect through Monday evening due to elevated winds
and waves. A few isolated gales are possible as well, mainly 
along the South Shore.

Thunderstorms will be possible Monday morning. 

$$

Unruh

More information may be obtained at the following web address: 
http://www.weather.gov/duluth
