FXUS63 KMPX 232055
AFDMPX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Twin Cities/Chanhassen MN
355 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.DISCUSSION...(This evening through Sunday)
Issued at 234 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

KEY MESSAGES: 

- Isolated to scattered thunderstorms late this evening into early 
  Monday morning, some of which may be strong to severe. 

- Strong winds through Monday afternoon, especially in southern MN.

- Seasonal temperatures in the 50s through midweek before a slight  
  warmup into the upper 50s by Halloween weekend. No significant 
  precip expected.

Tonight through Monday Night - Cyclogenesis well underway with a
potent surface low developing over central SD, owing to a pivoting  
large deep upper level trough in the western CONUS and plush moist 
southwesterly flow downstream of the upper trough and surface low. 
The warm front of this system is barely nudging into far SW MN this 
afternoon, and this front is expected to continue gradually lifting 
north through most of the WFO MPX coverage area this evening. 
Meanwhile, its associated cold front will reach the SD/MN border as 
the parent surface low shifts northeast into southern ND. The upper 
low will still slide off to the northeast over the next 12-24 hours, 
helping the wound-up surface low shove the cold front to the MN/WI 
border by daybreak Monday then into central WI by midday Monday. 
There is still a highly conditional risk of scattered thunderstorms, 
potentially some strong/severe this evening into the early morning 
hours. Strong low-level jetting with a strong vector difference 
vertically along with modest lapse rates may be contributors to 
surface-based thunderstorms possibly producing small severe-level 
hail (1.0" to 1.5" hail) or damaging wind gusts if storms take on 
bowing segment structure. That said, coverage per short-term CAMs is 
not impressive, and many locations not even see storms at all. Thus, 
the prevailing Marginal Risk may be more than sufficient with the 
lack of appreciable coverage and timing of the event well past peak 
heating, thus away from optimal instability. The precipitation looks 
to gradually end during the early Monday morning hours, with only 
lingering showers in western WI and east/southeast MN during the day 
Monday. The main issue will then be the strong persistent winds from 
this evening through Monday afternoon with really no definitive time 
that there could be a lull. Directions will slowly veer from S to SE 
but speeds this evening through Monday morning will run 15-25mph 
gusting 35-45mph. Speeds will only slowly diminish during the day 
Monday then settle down nicely after sunset Monday night to around 
10mph. As for temperatures, A noticeable drop in temperatures is 
coming. After highs today in the lower 70s to lower 80s, highs on 
Monday will have a sharp gradient, ranging from the mid 50s to mid 
60s west to east over central-southern MN and in the upper 60s to 
lower 70s in western WI. However, with cold air advection kicking in 
strongly Monday night, the forecast low temperatures will have a more
striking difference. After lows early Monday morning run in the 
lower 50s to mid 60s, lows early Tuesday morning will fall all the 
way to the 30s to near 40.

Tuesday through Saturday - Zonal westerly flow aloft still remains 
in the forecast beyond tonight's system. Temperatures will be fairly 
constant and seasonal as a result. Highs in the mid to low 50s and 
lows in the mid to upper 30s will create for typical fall weather all
week. Things might warm up a few degrees by the end of the week as 
winds become southerly on Thursday, advecting some warmer air ahead 
of a shortwave disturbance. The aforementioned disturbance is 
possible Thursday into Friday, but precipitation chances are 
uncertain this far out; However, this disturbance continues to be 
unimpressive. Most ensemble guidance members have little QPF outside 
of a few outliers, so even if it does precipitate, accumulation will 
be next to none.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1259 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR and breezy conditions at all terminals to start. As convection
gets underway this evening into the early morning hours, a potential 
period of TSRA is possible at each terminal, generally in the 03z-07z
timeframe. Could be an hour or two earlier as well. Have framed the 
TAFs to continue using PROB30s because of the uncertainty but as 
activity gets going later this evening, will be able to refine the 
TAFs to better time in the convection into each site. Outside of 
convection, conditions will remain as VFR, even with lower decks 
expected overnight through midday Monday. Winds will increase in 
speed overnight through tomorrow with speeds around 20G30kt from the 
S to SW. Strong nocturnal low-level jetting will continue to run very
strong around the 2 kft level, as speeds reach 50kt, making LLWS 
conditions likely.

KMSP...Best timing for precip looks to be in that 03z-07z timeframe, 
including TSRA dropping conditions to MVFR levels, but timing could 
be earlier by an hour or so. Otherwise, once precip ends, winds will 
gradually veer from S to SW but speed will continue to be elevated. 
Sustained speeds 15-20kt with gusts 30-40kt are expected this evening
through the overnight hours.

/OUTLOOK FOR KMSP/
Tue...VFR. Wind W 5-10 kts. 
Wed...VFR. Wind NW 5-10 kts.
Thu...Mainly VFR. Chance -SHRA/MVFR. Wind SE 10 kts.

&&

.MPX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MN...Wind Advisory from 7 PM this evening to 3 AM CDT Monday for Blue 
     Earth-Dakota-Faribault-Freeborn-Goodhue-Le Sueur-Martin-Rice-
     Scott-Steele-Waseca.

WI...None.
&&

$$

DISCUSSION...JPC/PEM
AVIATION...JPC
