FXUS63 KMPX 231832
AFDMPX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Twin Cities/Chanhassen MN
132 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1259 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Updated for the 18z aviation discussion below.

&&

.DISCUSSION...(Today through Saturday)
Issued at 312 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

KEY MESSAGES: 

- Isolated to scattered thunderstorms late this evening into early 
  Monday morning, some of which may be strong to severe.

- One more much above normal temperature day today then behind the 
  cold front next week will see near to slightly above normal 
  temperatures.

Sunday and Monday... Today and tomorrow's weather will continue to 
be driven by the western CONUS trough that will lift into Canada by 
Tuesday. We will see continued warm air advection today into tonight.
By Monday morning the 850 mb flow will switch to cooler air wrapped 
around the upper low from Canada bringing an end to our warm up. So 
today we will see temperatures similar to what we saw yesterday with 
highs within a few degrees of records, but falling well short. One of
the differences today compared to yesterday though will be better 
moisture transport as moisture from the Gulf will finally be arriving
and bringing up dew points. This will help elevate humidity values 
to make today less of a fire weather risk. On the other side having 
more moisture and the cold front approaching will provide the setup 
for our thunderstorm chances today. Once again thunderstorm chances 
look better farther south and we will likely have a capping inversion
from the WAA aloft, so this is a highly conditional setup. This 
means like many of our other events this past summer there will be 
rain winners and losers. Unfortunately there will be some that end 
up with no rain at all, which with our drought is bad news. Based on 
the timing of convective initiation we will be past peak heating and 
surface based CAPE does not look impressive, it more of a ML CAPE 
event. The shear however looks to be very impressive with HRRR 0-3 km
of over 500 m2/s2 present. There is also some impressive low level 
shear such that if any storm does get surface based there could be a 
tornado risk. With LCLs likely above 1 km though the tornado threat 
remains low and if it does occur it will be in western Minnesota 
closer to the main low and cold front. As for the hail the 
thermodynamic profile is not one that would suggest large hail as 
you would typically want more CAPE for that. That doesn't mean hail 
isn't a threat just that we are looking more at quarter size or 
smaller hail. The wind threat will be greatest in western Minnesota 
for similar reasons as listed for the tornado threat closer to the 
low and front therefore more likely to be surface based enough to mix
high winds to the surface. Today will also see some gusty winds of 
30 to 40 mph with some locations in southern Minnesota getting into 
the 40 to 50 mph range. This is largely thanks to the passing low 
pressure system and the associated tight pressure gradient across the
Upper Midwest. As the low moves out Monday this gradient will lessen
and so will the winds. 

Tuesday through Saturday... Behind the low's passage Tuesday into 
next weekend will see mostly zonal westerly flow aloft with a 
shortwave possible late week. This will provide a calmer period of 
weather with near to slightly above normal temperatures possible. 
The late week shortwave does not look impressive and at this time and 
most ensemble guidance between GEFS, CMC, and EPS members have little
QPF outside of a few outliers. Temperatures will be fairly constant 
with highs in the low to mid 50s and the slightly above normal 
comment comes more from normals going down about 1 degree every two 
days right now.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1259 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

VFR and breezy conditions at all terminals to start. As convection
gets underway this evening into the early morning hours, a potential 
period of TSRA is possible at each terminal, generally in the 03z-07z
timeframe. Could be an hour or two earlier as well. Have framed the 
TAFs to continue using PROB30s because of the uncertainty but as 
activity gets going later this evening, will be able to refine the 
TAFs to better time in the convection into each site. Outside of 
convection, conditions will remain as VFR, even with lower decks 
expected overnight through midday Monday. Winds will increase in 
speed overnight through tomorrow with speeds around 20G30kt from the 
S to SW. Strong nocturnal low-level jetting will continue to run very
strong around the 2 kft level, as speeds reach 50kt, making LLWS 
conditions likely.

KMSP...Best timing for precip looks to be in that 03z-07z timeframe,
including TSRA dropping conditions to MVFR levels, but timing could
be earlier by an hour or so. Otherwise, once precip ends, winds will
gradually veer from S to SW but speed will continue to be elevated.
Sustained speeds 15-20kt with gusts 30-40kt are expected this evening
through the overnight hours.

/OUTLOOK FOR KMSP/
Tue...VFR. Wind W 5-10 kts. 
Wed...VFR. Wind NW 5-10 kts.
Thu...Mainly VFR. Chance -SHRA/MVFR. Wind SE 10 kts.

&&

.MPX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
MN...Wind Advisory from 7 PM this evening to 3 AM CDT Monday for Blue 
     Earth-Dakota-Faribault-Freeborn-Goodhue-Le Sueur-Martin-Rice-
     Scott-Steele-Waseca.

WI...None.
&&

$$

UPDATE...JPC
DISCUSSION...NDC
AVIATION...JPC
