FXUS61 KBGM 220134
AFDBGM

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Binghamton NY
934 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A strong ridge of high pressure remains in control of our
weather through Saturday. This will bring clear skies, chilly
nights but unseasonably warm daytime temperatures to the 
region. Clouds start to increase on Sunday, with a chance for a
few late day and overnight rain showers across the Catskills and
Poconos as a weak coastal low develops. The weather then looks
to remain mainly dry, quiet and warm heading into early next week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY/...
Only minor changes to the previous discussion below with the
early and mid evening updates.  

140 PM Update

Very quiet weather expected through the near term period as a
strong ridge of high pressure remains in control of our weather.
The main challenge will be the diurnal spread in temperatures 
likely being a bit more than the latest NBM guidance would 
indicate.

Expect clear skies tonight, with perhaps just a passing high
cloud or two. Main adjustment to the forecast was to lower 
overnight low temperatures in the protected valleys of CNY and 
NE PA where a strong low level inversion is expected to develop
in the 900-950mb layer. A 1025mb surface high noses into the
Catskills & NE PA, meanwhile a stronger pressure gradient
remains in place across the Finger Lakes region. This will mean
light surface winds across much of NE PA, the Catskills and Twin
Tiers...with a much steadier south wind between 10-20 mph across
the Finger Lakes, higher elevations south of Syracuse and Utica.
Boundary layer and 30 meter winds are around 35kts across the
northern portion of the area tonight.

Again, overnight lows were tricky, but the current forecast 
shows highly variable lows ranging from the lower 30s in the 
deeper protected valleys, to low and mid-40s across the Finger 
lakes/Syracuse metro. It's possible the valleys could even get a
bit colder than this if the inversion remains strong.

Quiet, sunny and warm weather continues through the day on
Saturday. Not expecting any clouds through the day. South winds
increase between 7-15 mph by late morning and afternoon...this
will help to boost temperatures into the mid-60s to lower 70s by
afternoon across the area. This is about 10-15 degrees above the
seasonal average. Lowered dew points closer to the NBM 10th
percentile guidance, as very dry air is expected to mix down to
the surface.

Much of the same for Saturday night, as a 1027mb surface high
sets up across the eastern portion of the area. 850mb temperatures
hold around +10c with another strong low level inversion 
expected. Clear skies to start for the first half of the night 
will allow temperatures to fall quickly at first, and there 
could even be some patchy fog developing in the deeper river &
creek valleys. Late at night some mid and high level clouds will
spread in from the southeast as a weak coastal low takes shape 
across the Carolinas and Virgina tidewater. Once again went 
below NBM guidance for lows in the valleys; ranging from the low
to mid-30s to mid-40s again.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SATURDAY NIGHT THROUGH MONDAY NIGHT/...
220 PM Update...

The area will be on the edge of high pressure from western NY to
Georgia but a front on the East coast will push moisture and
showers into the area. Uncertainty on how far west the rain
comes. The GFS and Can are dry while the ECMWF and NAM are wet
for the SE half. Waves move up the front with first for us 
Sunday afternoon into Monday. The best chances for rain showers 
will be in the upslope areas of the northern Poconos to the 
western Catskills Sunday night. Further west the rain will have
to saturate the dry low levels due to high pressure. 

Rainfall amounts up to half an inch in Sullivan County NY/Pike
County PA to less than a tenth of an inch Utica to Binghamton.
Rain is not expected in the Finger Lakes and central southern
tier. 

Temperatures will continue to be mild. Highs Sunday from the
upper 60s in the Finger Lakes to low 60s Catskills and Poconos.
Lows Sunday night in the 40s. Monday highs a tad warmer and
mostly in the mid and upper 60s with more sunshine and showers
moving out. Monday night lows from the upper 40s to lower 50s.

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
220 PM update...
Not much change. The model guidance has not changed so
uncertainty on when rain starts and for how long with the
surface front and weak upper level trough. This is for the 
Tuesday to Thursday period. For Friday into the weekend, high
pressure builds into the Great Lakes but no agreement on where
it is centered. Temperatures mostly at or above normal.

345 AM Update:

Overall, quite a tricky forecast is anticipated for the long
term period, especially for the mid-week period.

On Tuesday, we will likely be in between systems with an
amplified trough and surface low pressure system located across
the southern Plains/Midwest and Atlantic moisture from an area
of low pressure system located well east of the Mid-Atlantic
coast. Just enough moisture may be in place for a stray shower
possible east of I-81, but the majority of the area is expected
to remain dry. With this Atlantic moisture, areas east of I-81
will likely be mostly cloudy, with partial sunshine expected
elsewhere. With upper level ridging in place and southerly
winds, temperatures will be well above normal for late October
standards, with highs expected to be in the upper 60s to mid 
70s.

The forecast for Wednesday into Thursday becomes rather
uncertain as our region will remain in between more Atlantic
moisture surging northward and an approaching frontal
system/upper level trough moving northeastward from the
Midwest/Ohio Valley. Some model guidance, such as the 00Z ECMWF
have this trough moving much quicker and therefore merging with
the Atlantic moisture. As a result, the ECMWF is the wetter 
solution for Wednesday into Thursday. Meanwhile other model 
guidance, such as the 00Z GFS and Canadian have a much slower 
trough/frontal system and keeps the Atlantic moisture well east 
of the region. As a result, these solutions keep the region 
mainly dry. With this uncertainty, PoPs are no higher than low- 
end chance for this period. Either way, temperatures look to 
continue to be above normal with 60s and 70s for high 
temperatures and 50s for lows.

&&

.AVIATION /02Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
VFR conditions will occur at all terminals for this TAF period.
Winds Saturday afternoon around 10 knots from the south 
otherwise mainly light. Some marginal LLWS around 2-3,000 feet
for a few hours tonight from the southwest likely at most NY
terminals. 

Outlook...

Saturday night into Sunday...Mainly VFR expected. Patchy valley
fog.

Sunday afternoon through Monday morning...Minor restrictions 
possible in light rain, most likely at AVP, RME and BGM.

Monday afternoon through Tuesday night...Mainly VFR expected.

Wednesday...Mainly VFR, but there is a low chance for rain
showers and possible associated restrictions.

&&

.BGM WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
PA...None.
NY...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...MJM
NEAR TERM...MJM/MWG
SHORT TERM...TAC
LONG TERM...BJG/TAC
AVIATION...MWG
