FXUS61 KALY 212326
AFDALY

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Albany NY
726 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure will remain anchored along the southern New 
England and mid Atlantic coast tonight through much of the 
weekend. This will provide mainly clear skies and moderating 
temperatures. A low pressure system over the western Atlantic 
will track northward towards New England late Sunday into Sunday
night. This system may bring some showers to our region, 
especially east of Albany.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY/...
As of 7:15 pm...Winds are diminishing and have decoupled in 
many areas and skies are clear. Just a few mid- and high-level 
clouds expected to pass over tonight. Temperatures are dropping
and now range from around 40 degrees into the mid 50s with dew 
points in the mid 20s to mid 30s. Forecast is in good shape with
only minor adjustments needed.

PREVIOUS [3:20 pm]...Tranquil conditions in store for tonight 
with high pressure positioned just to the south/east of our 
region. Winds should decouple allowing for decent cooling with 
mainly clear skies in place. Lows will likely not get as cool as
last night, with mainly 30s expected. Frost/Freeze headlines 
will no longer be issued through the rest of the year, as the 
growing season has ended across our entire forecast area.

On Saturday, after a chilly start to the day, temperatures 
should warm considerably by afternoon as the air mass moderates.
Anomalously warm air aloft will advect in (850 temperature 
anomalies increase to +1 to +2 STDEV). A light southerly breeze 
will aide in mixing, along with abundant sunshine. Highs should 
reach the mid 60s in most valley locations, resulting in ~30F 
degree diurnal temperature jump from the morning.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SATURDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY NIGHT/...
More quiet weather expected Saturday night, with high pressure 
remaining in place near the coast. Due to the air mass 
moderating, lows will not be as chilly as recent nights with mid
30 to lower 40s forecast. High level cirrus clouds will start 
to increase from south to north overnight.

Forecast confidence decreases on Sunday, as there is 
uncertainty with regards to how quickly chances for showers will
increase associated with an inverted surface trough approaching
from the south. Forcing looks rather weak, but there will be an
increase in moisture (PWAT anomalies increasing to +1 to +2 
STDEV) during the afternoon to evening. Most sources of guidance
indicating some showers brushing the southeast part of the area
late in the day. However, there are differences in 
position/timing of the trough, so will limit mention to chance 
PoPs south/east of Albany. With increasing/thickening clouds, 
temperatures will be slightly cooler than Saturday but still 
above normal given the mild air mass in place.

A better chance for showers arrives Sunday night as forcing 
increases with the inverted trough getting closer (remaining 
just off the southern New England coast). Will continue to side 
with NBM PoPs, which limits mention of likely PoPs to areas 
south/east of Albany, with chance PoPs from Albany north/west. 
QPF should generally be hydrologically insignificant, with 
beneficial rainfall around 0.25-0.75" in the small remaining 
drought areas (Dutchess/Litchfield counties). Rainfall amounts 
could vary with quite a bit of spread among the guidance. Lows 
will be mild due to the clouds/showers with mainly 40s to around
50.

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Long term period will feature chances for precipitation Monday 
and again for the middle to end of the week. Tuesday looks like 
the driest day. Temperatures will run a few to several degrees 
above normal for most of the long term. More details below...

Long term period begins at 12z Monday with large-scale 
troughing over the western half of the country and ridging aloft
over the eastern US and North Atlantic. The closed upper low 
that will move up the east coast Sunday/Sunday night will open 
up and weaken as it moves northwards. The upper-level feature 
will be associated with an inverted trough at the surface, which
will likely spread showers into southern New England and 
possibly New York on Monday. High pressure is expected to be 
located to our northeast, so it remains to be seen how far west 
showers make it. Therefore, this is a lower confidence portion 
of the forecast. Highs will generally be in the 50s and 60s with
lows in the 40s and 50s.

Tuesday, the surface inverted trough/weak surface low pulls 
away, but the shortwave aloft hangs around due to the blocking 
ridge to our east over the Atlantic. Therefore, while a few 
showers cannot be ruled out, Tuesday looks drier. Wednesday 
through Thursday, the upper ridge over the Atlantic weakens and 
a stronger shortwave embedded in southwesterly flow aloft looks 
to track towards the region. While the timing of this feature is
highly uncertain, the general trend is for an increasing chance
for showers again Wednesday or Thursday. Drier weather returns 
for Friday as high pressure builds in behind this system. Highs 
will be in the 60s to around 70 Tuesday and Wednesday and 50s to
mid 60s Thursday and Friday. Overnight lows remain several 
degrees above normal with 40s and 50s each night.

&&

.AVIATION /23Z FRIDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
Through 00z Sunday...VFR conditions should prevail through at least 
the end of the TAF period. There could be a few high clouds around 
tonight, but otherwise mostly clear skies are expected through 00z 
tomorrow. Winds tonight will generally be light to calm and 
variable. Tomorrow morning through the end of the TAF period, winds 
will be from the south at 5-10 kt. Saturday.

Outlook...

Saturday Night: No Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.
Sunday: Low Operational Impact. Slight Chance of SHRA.
Sunday Night: Moderate Operational Impact. Chance of SHRA.
Monday: Moderate Operational Impact. Chance of SHRA.
Monday Night: Low Operational Impact. Slight Chance of SHRA.
Tuesday: No Operational Impact. NO SIG WX.
Tuesday Night: Low Operational Impact. Slight Chance of SHRA.
Wednesday: Moderate Operational Impact. Chance of SHRA.

&&

.ALY WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CT...None.
NY...None.
MA...None.
VT...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...JPV
NEAR TERM...IAA/JPV
SHORT TERM...JPV
LONG TERM...Main
AVIATION...Main
