FXUS66 KMFR 220241
AFDMFR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Medford OR
741 PM PDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.DISCUSSION...An update was sent to raise minimum temperatures
tonight, primarily due to the cloud cover and precipitation
expected over the region. The going forecast MinT grid appeared 
to have too much bias-correction (which likely factored in the
clear, cool nights we've had for several mornings in a row). This
was especially the case for areas over the East Side. The clouds 
should keep temperatures from dropping that low tonight -- the
exception being over the higher elevations, where colder air is
moving in (compared to recent nighttime temps). Preference was 
given to the RAW guidance instead, which typically does better in 
these cooler/wetter pattern change regimes. 

Most of the remainder of the forecast looks to be in good shape.
It's windy over the East Side, where some RAWS sites have gusted
in the 40-50 mph range. We have a wind advisory up til 2 am PDT. 
A cold front is moving onshore currently and will move through 
overnight, pushing SE of the area by Saturday morning. Recent 7 pm
web cams are showing rain! at the coast, in areas to the N&W of 
Medford and over to the Cascades (as far south as Highway 140). 
Expect this frontal rain to gradually move into the rest of the 
Rogue Valley this evening and overnight, with just about everyone,
even areas east of the Cascades and in NorCal, getting at least a
little rain by sunrise Saturday. Post-frontal showers will 
continue Saturday with the most activity focused along and west of
the Cascades/Siskiyous. There can also be thunderstorms across NW
sections as the cold pool aloft moves in. Please check out your 
local point-and-click forecasts to see if thunder is forecast for
your specific location on weather.gov/mfr. Snow levels drop to 
4000-5000 feet Saturday. Since it's the first weather system 
following a very warm period, snow accumulations will likely be 
restricted to the highest elevations (mainly above 5000 feet). We
do have a Winter Weather Advisory up there til 5 am Sunday. So, 
if you're planning a trip up to Crater Lake this weekend, be 
prepared for wintry conditions. Moist NW flow will continue
to produce showers into the Cascades through early Sunday 
morning, but since the trough axis will be shifting to the east, 
most of Sunday should turn out dry, albeit on the cool side. 
-Spilde

&&

.AVIATION...22/00Z TAFs...Over the coastal waters, along the coast, 
and in the coastal valleys...VFR conditions with local MVFR cigs 
will prevail initially. An incoming front will bring areas of MVFR 
cigs in low clouds and rain into Friday evening with higher terrain 
becoming obscured. Showers and isolated thunderstorms will develop 
Friday evening behind the front. These conditions will then persist 
through Saturday.

From the Cascades westward...VFR conditions will persist into Friday 
evening, except for areas of MVFR vsbys in haze and smoke in the 
Umpqua Basin. An incoming front will bring areas of MVFR cigs in low 
clouds and rain beginning Friday evening and spreading inland to 
the Cascades Friday night with higher terrain becoming obscured. 
Showers and isolated thunderstorms will develop Friday night 
behind the front. These conditions will then persist through 
Saturday.

East of the Cascades...VFR conditions will prevail through Friday. 
Strong and gusty winds will continue through Friday night. An 
incoming front will bring precipitation to the area beginning Friday 
evening with areas of higher terrain becoming obscured. Showers will 
develop Friday night behind the front. These conditions will then 
persist through Saturday, except that winds will diminish
Saturday.

&&

.MARINE...Updated 200 PM PDT Friday 21 October 2022...A cold front
will move onshore Friday evening. Moderate northwest swell will 
build Friday night, bringing very steep seas to the area. The
swell will subside Sunday, and steep seas will persist into Sunday
evening. The pattern will remain active Monday into Tuesday with
more fronts moving onshore. High pressure will build over the
waters Wednesday. Another round of moderate northwest swell will
move through Wednesday. 

&&

.PREV DISCUSSION... /Issued 306 PM PDT Fri Oct 21 2022/ 

SYNOPSIS...We are in a transition day before the first in a
series of fronts moves through southern Oregon and northern
California. This will provide several bursts of active weather for
the next several days with breaks in between.

Key Points:

* Gusty winds are expected today east of the Cascades. This may
  cause issues for high profile vehicles, and could blow away
  unsecured objects. Please see the NPWMFR for more details.
* Snow levels will begin at 9000 feet this evening and lower to
  4000 feet on Saturday. Some accumulations are expected, largely
  above 5000 feet. Snow will turn to snow showers
* We have issued a winter weather advisory for a portion of the
  southern Oregon Cascades above 5000 feet. Please see the WSWMFR
  for more details.
* There is a slight chance for a thunderstorm to occur on Saturday
  along the coast, coast range, and Umpqua Valley. 

DISCUSSION...Satellite imagery is showing some higher clouds
across most of southern Oregon and northern California. This is
indicative of the change in weather. Winds at Summer lake are
already beginning to gust near 40 mph, and expect this to continue
for most of the evening and overnight period. Have extended the
wind advisory until 5 AM for windy conditions. Please see the
NPWMFR for more details.

The HRRR model suggests that precipitation will begin at the coast
in a couple of hours (around 5 PM) and spreading inland over the
remainder of the evening. This seems reasonable. This rainfall
will likely be wetting for many areas of southern Oregon and
northern California. The heaviest precipitation amounts will be at
the Coos County Coast and Coast Range as well as for the Cascades
with lesser amounts in the valleys. In all, this rain will be
enough to likely bring fire season to a conclusion for a large
part of the area (but maybe not all of it quite yet). While this
might spark concerns for debris flows over burn scars, do not
believe that there will be high enough rain rates to create this.
This risk would increase a little on Saturday when rain rates
increase in showers, however the rainfall duration over the burn
scars in showers would likely be brief enough to keep the risk for
debris flows at extremely low levels.

Snow levels will start off around 9000 feet and drop to around 
4000 on Saturday. After the front moves through showers of snow
will likely continue across the Cascades and portions of the East
Side. A winter weather advisory is in effect tonight from 5 AM
Saturday through 5 AM Sunday for a portion of the Cascades north
of Highway 140 above 5000 feet. While snowfall accumulations on 
roads may be a little less than what is advertised in snowfall 
amounts due to melting, some accumulations are possible on the 
roads above 5000 feet. With it having been so warm as of late and
it being the first of the season, decided an advisory was
appropriate.

A break is expected on Sunday. With clearing skies, expect
temperatures to be pretty cold, likely coldest of the fall so far.
This may end summer growing seasons for many West Side Valleys
(maybe not for the Umpqua Basin). Freeze watches may be needed,
but will allow subsequent shifts to analyze those. 

The next system appears to arrive next Tuesday night into
Wednesday. Ensembles are showing this to be another robust system
with additional periods of moderate rain with snow levels falling
back to around 4000 to 5000 feet. This system will have the chance
to produce additional impacts, so it is worth keeping an eye to
the forecast for more details. In fact, conditions are proving
favorable for increased active weather with the Climate Prediction
Center showing high confidence in above normal precipitation in
the 8 to 14 day outlook. This is good news for us for drought
concerns, but we would continue to rely on November, December, and
January to be active in order to really help with our ongoing
drought. -Schaaf

AVIATION...21/18Z TAFs...Over the coastal waters, along the coast, 
and in the coastal valleys...VFR conditions with local MVFR cigs 
will prevail initially. An incoming front will bring areas of MVFR 
cigs in low clouds and rain Friday afternoon into Friday evening 
with higher terrain becoming obscured. Showers and isolated 
thunderstorms will develop Friday evening behind the front. These 
conditions will then persist through Saturday.

From the Cascades westward...VFR conditions will persist into Friday 
afternoon, except for areas of MVFR vsbys in haze and smoke in the 
Umpqua Basin. An incoming front will bring areas of MVFR cigs in low 
clouds and rain beginning Friday afternoon and spreading inland to 
the Cascades Friday evening with higher terrain becoming obscured. 
Showers and isolated thunderstorms will develop Friday evening 
behind the front. These conditions will then persist through 
Saturday.

East of the Cascades...VFR conditions will prevail through Friday. 
Winds will become strong and gusty Friday afternoon and continue 
through Friday night. An incoming front will bring precipitation to 
the area beginning Friday evening with areas of higher terrain 
becoming obscured. Showers will develop Friday night behind the 
front. These conditions will then persist through Saturday, except 
that winds will diminish Saturday.

MARINE...Updated 200 PM PDT Friday 21 October 2022...A cold front
will move onshore Friday evening. Moderate northwest swell will 
build Friday night, bringing very steep seas to the area. The
swell will subside Sunday, and steep seas will persist into Sunday
evening. The pattern will remain active Monday into Tuesday with
more fronts moving onshore. High pressure will build over the
waters Wednesday. Another round of moderate northwest swell will
move through Wednesday. 

&&

.MFR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
OR...Wind Advisory until 5 AM PDT Saturday for ORZ030-031.

     Winter Weather Advisory from 5 AM Saturday to 5 AM PDT Sunday 
     for ORZ027-028.

CA...Wind Advisory until 5 AM PDT Saturday for CAZ085.

Pacific Coastal Waters...Hazardous Seas Warning from 11 PM this 
     evening to 5 AM PDT Sunday for PZZ350-356-370-376.

     Small Craft Advisory from 5 AM to 11 PM PDT Sunday for PZZ350-
     356-370-376.

     Small Craft Advisory until 11 PM PDT this evening for PZZ370.

&&

$$

MAS/MAP
