FLUS45 KRIW 220123
HWORIW

Hazardous Weather Outlook
National Weather Service Riverton WY
723 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

WYZ001>020-022>030-221045-
Yellowstone National Park-Absaroka Mountains-Cody Foothills-
North Big Horn Basin-Southwest Big Horn Basin-
Southeast Big Horn Basin-Owl Creek and Bridger Mountains-
Bighorn Mountains West-Bighorn Mountains Southeast-
Northeast Johnson County-Southeast Johnson County-
Teton and Gros Ventre Mountains-Jackson Hole-
Wind River Mountains West-Wind River Mountains East-
Upper Wind River Basin-Wind River Basin-Lander Foothills-
Green Mountains and Rattlesnake Range-
Natrona County Lower Elevations-Casper Mountain-Star Valley-
Salt River and Wyoming Ranges-Upper Green River Basin Foothills-
Upper Green River Basin-South Lincoln County-
Rock Springs and Green River-Flaming Gorge-East Sweetwater County-
723 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

...Multiple Winter Weather highlights are posted for tonight through
Sunday night across western Wyoming...

...High Wind Watches are in effect for parts of central and southern 
Wyoming on Saturday...

This Hazardous Weather Outlook is for Western and Central Wyoming.

.DAY ONE...Tonight.

Rain will develop at the lower elevations of northwest Wyoming 
tonight. Snow will develop in the higher elevations tonight, with 
snow levels lowering late tonight. 

.DAYS TWO THROUGH SEVEN...Saturday through Thursday.

Saturday and Sunday...A strong cold front pushes across the area.
West to southwest wind gusts of 60 to 70 mph possible across 
central and southern portions Saturday. Significant snowfall is 
possible over the far western mountains. Minor snow accumulations 
could occur in the western valleys Saturday night and Sunday. 
Some light snow is expected east of the divide on Sunday.

.SPOTTER INFORMATION STATEMENT...

Weather spotters are encouraged to report significant weather 
conditions, according to standard operating procedures.

$$

Team Riverton
