FXUS65 KCYS 212323
AFDCYS

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Cheyenne WY
523 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SHORT TERM...(Rest of Today through Tomorrow Night) 
Issued at 258 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Key Impact Messages:

1) Extreme fire weather conditions continue this afternoon and 
into the early evening. Critical fire weather conditions expected 
for eastern Wyoming and the Nebraska Panhandle Saturday afternoon.

2) High winds (gusts greater than 58 mph) will continue through
tomorrow morning. There might be a brief lull in the winds this
evening, but winds are progged to ramp back up around midnight
tonight. These winds will be primarily across the wind prone
areas, along I-80 from Rawlins to Cheyenne and parts of the I-25
corridor.

Weather Details: Going to be busy next 30 hours across much of the
region. The first hazard will be the critical to extremely
critical fire weather conditions continuing through this evening
with critical fire weather conditions expected tomorrow 
afternoon. For more details, see the Fire Weather Discussion 
below.

Current High Wind Warnings remain on track for this forecast
package. Both of the high wind prone areas have verified with
multiple sites on I-80 in the Arlington area have gusted over 60
mph. Observations across I-25 from Bear Creek to Bordeaux also saw
gusts over 58 mph this afternoon. A brief lull in the high winds
is expected as a shield of upper level clouds is moving across 
the area this afternoon. This will temporarily reduce the wind 
speeds for a 1-2 hr period. All indications are for a ramp up in 
the wind speeds later this evening as mountain wave activity 
becomes more apparent. The best window for mountain wave activity 
looks to be between midnight tonight and 6 AM MDT Saturday. This 
time frame is when the I-25 corridor from Cheyenne to Bordeaux may
see periods of wind gusts between 60 to 65 mph. As the storm 
system approaches western Wyoming the axis of strong winds will 
shift east tomorrow afternoon. Elevated winds seem probable across
eastern Wyoming and the Nebraska Panhandle. Not looking like high
winds will occur, but gusts up to 40 mph will be possible.

.LONG TERM...(Saturday night through Friday)
Issued at 258 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Main concern later this weekend looks to be the first snow event 
across south-central into southeast Wyoming. Headed into Saturday 
night, a large upper level trough will be approaching the area 
ushering in a colder airmass along with the chance for 
precipitation. Based on the forecast position of the upper level jet 
and 500mb vort max, the surface low will most likely develop too far 
north for a significant winter event to unfold. However, that does 
not mean local impacts will not develop. 

Precipitation will initially begin across Carbon Co Saturday night 
into Sunday morning with snowfall mainly over the mountains. A cold 
front will sweep across the CWA Sunday reaching the CO border by 
late afternoon. As the colder air moves into the region, snowfall 
will develop or transition over from ongoing rainfall. Snowfall east 
of the Laramie Range will be most likely delayed until Sunday night 
as the colder air settles in with light accumulations possible 
before favorable lift moves off to the northeast. Will need to 
monitor for potentially enhanced bands of precipitation with 
frontally forced convection as forecast sounding do show marginal 
low level instability present as the colder air arrives. This could 
potentially lead to slightly heavier precipitation along the 
Laramie/Platte county border early Sunday evening.

For headlines, included the Snowys, Sierra Madres, and southwest 
Carbon Co into a Winter Weather Advisory for late Saturday night 
into early Monday morning. Could see the need for expansion of 
Advisory headlines into remaining portions of Carbon Co, but at this 
lead time decided to keep it to the areas with highest confidence. 
Additionally, favorable southwest upslope flow over the Sierra Madre 
mountains could lead to slightly higher snowfall totals approaching 
1 ft. Will need to monitor upcoming forecast cycles for higher 
snowfall totals than current forecast, but WPC probability of 
snowfall greater than 1 ft is less than 10% at this time for the 
Sierra Madres.  

Beyond this weekend's snow event, multiple hazards could be at play 
next week ending the relatively quiet weather pattern we've had the 
first half of the month across the CWA. Strong northwest winds aloft 
will lead to elevated winds gusting around 40 mph across most areas 
east of the Laramie Range, especially the northern Nebraska 
Panhandle and the Pine Ridge Monday afternoon. Strong 700mb winds 
then take focus over the wind prone locations of southeast Wyoming 
Tuesday with strong gradients present. Later in the week, most 
models show a progressive trough digging towards the four corners 
region Wednesday night into Thursday. This will bring another chance 
for precipitation to the area with snowfall possible mainly west of 
the Laramie Range as 700mb temps remain around -5C for most of next 
week. However, latest GEFS shows higher uncertainty for this system 
towards the middle of next week.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 00Z TAFS through 00Z Saturday evening)
Issued at 519 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Wyoming TAFS...VFR. Wind gusts to 45 knots until 05Z, then gusts
to 36 knots until 13Z, then gusts to 43 knots.

Nebraska TAFS...VFR. Wind gusts to 32 knots at Alliance,
Scottsbluff and Sidney until 03Z, then gusts to 28 knots at all
terminals after 13Z.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 258 PM MDT Fri Oct 21 2022

Current Red Flag Warnings have performed very well
this afternoon. Much of region is seeing strong west to west-
northwest winds gusting between 45 and 60 mph. Observations are
also showing a large portion of the region below 15 percent
relative humidity. Winds will remain elevated through the evening
hours and poor RH recovery is expected to occur for areas across
eastern Wyoming and the Nebraska Panhandle. An approaching storm
system will move toward western Wyoming on Saturday. The bulk of
the strongest winds will shift east tomorrow into eastern Wyoming
and the Nebraska Panhandle. Critical Fire Weather conditions
expected to develop across these areas, thus a Fire Weather Watch
has been issued for tomorrow afternoon.

&&

.CYS WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
WY...Red Flag Warning until 7 PM MDT this evening for WYZ417>433.

     Fire Weather Watch from Saturday morning through Saturday 
     evening for WYZ430>433.

     High Wind Warning until 6 PM MDT Saturday for WYZ104>107-109-110-
     115>117.

     Winter Weather Advisory from 3 AM Sunday to 6 AM MDT Monday for 
     WYZ111.

     Winter Weather Advisory from 9 PM Saturday to 6 AM MDT Monday 
     for WYZ112-114.

     High Wind Warning until 9 AM MDT Saturday for WYZ118.

NE...Red Flag Warning until 7 PM MDT this evening for NEZ434>437.

     Fire Weather Watch from Saturday morning through Saturday 
     evening for NEZ434>437.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...AW
LONG TERM...MB
AVIATION...RUBIN
FIRE WEATHER...AW
