FXUS61 KBTV 220225
AFDBTV

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Burlington VT
1025 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Dry and breezy weather is anticipated from tonight through 
Sunday. Our next chance for showers will come Sunday night. 
Daytime maximum temperatures will be about ten degrees above 
seasonal normals this weekend, then warming even further early 
next week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY NIGHT/...
As of 1022 PM EDT Friday...Main adjustment to the forecast for 
this late evening update was to increase temps across the
broader valleys and higher elevations for the remainder of the
night. Warm air advection has raced in aloft as expected with
the higher summits gusting over 40 mph and mid-slope regions
warming from the mid-30s a few hours ago to low-40s as of
present. Should still see some sheltered locations across
eastern Vermont fall into the low/mid-30s, but elsewhere lows
will generally be in the mid/upper-40s.

Previous Discussion...Surface high pressure anchored off 
the New England coast will provide our region with dry weather 
and clear skies from tonight through Saturday night. Minimum 
temperatures will be just slightly warmer than seasonal normals,
but daytime maximum temperatures will run about ten degrees 
above seasonal normals for late October. With gradient winds 
once again continuing overnight, not anticipating any fog 
formation despite clear skies. Minimum temperatures will range 
from around 30 in the Dacks and Northeast Kingdom to the lower 
40s in the Champlain valley. Should have nearly full sunshine 
for most of Saturday and relative humidities dipping into the 30
percent range, high temperatures will range through the 60s. 
Could see a couple 70 degree readings as well. Then we'll once 
again have a clear night Saturday night as we remain under 
influence of high pressure just off the coast of New England. 
Minimum temperatures Saturday night will range from the lower 
30s in the Dacks to the lower 40s closest to Lake Champlain.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SUNDAY THROUGH SUNDAY NIGHT/...
As of 302 PM EDT Friday...On Sunday, a strong ridge of high 
pressure will remain overhead and the day will be dry. We should
start clear, and then see high clouds increase ahead of a plume
of moisture. It doesn't seem likely that any precipitation will
arrive until the overnight hours. High temperatures will be 
warmest north where skies will remain clearer for longer, with 
upper 60s to lower 70s, and then mid 60s south. Anticipate warm 
conditions overnight, with lows in the 40s to near 50. Most 
precipitation should arrive towards midnight. How long it 
remains will depend on how quickly a mid-level trough turns flow
southwesterly and sends the plume of moisture east. Either way,
it will be decaying as it pushes into New England, but 
precipitation chances look good (40-70 percent) for Vermont, and
less so for New York (10-40 percent).

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
As of 302 PM EDT Friday...Lingering showers associated with a 
push of tropical moisture should be on its way out Monday 
morning and afternoon. We will get into a relatively dry pocket 
for next Tuesday, but it appears rain chances slowly return as a
vigorous trough reaches the Mississippi River valley and moist,
southerly flow becomes reestablished. It will remain rather 
warm in the extended with forecast temperatures 10 F degrees 
above normal. Much of our area won't experience a freeze for 
several days in this warm up.

Wednesday night into Thursday, the aforementioned vigorous 
trough will approach the North Country. This will result in a 
more substantial increase in rain chances. However, there are a 
number of timing differences still, and there are some hints 
that another shortwave in the Atlantic could lift into the Gulf 
of Maine, and effectively keep moisture well east of our region.
Thus, we could still see rain, but it could be scattered, and 
tied to a cold front as it picks up moisture off Lake Ontario to
compensate. With that, only offering a 40 PoP for Wednesday 
evening into early Thursday based on NBM data at this time. 
Behind this system, we should cool a bit, but still remain above
the average temperatures for this point in the year.

&&

.AVIATION /03Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
Through 00Z Sunday...VFR conditions will prevail at all sites
for the next 12 to 24 hours. Main aviation impacts will be winds
and localized areas of wind shear and turbulence. South winds 4
to 8 knots continues overnight, before increasing 10 to 15 knots
with localized gusts 20 to 25 knots possible as deeper mixing
occurs by 15z Sat. Best potential for areas of enhanced wind
shear wl be acrs the MSS/SLK taf sites, where low level winds
are strongest. Otherwise, some mid/upper level clouds pass by
from time to time over the next 24 hours. 

Outlook...

Saturday Night: VFR. NO SIG WX.
Sunday: VFR. NO SIG WX.
Sunday Night: VFR. Chance SHRA.
Monday: Mainly VFR, with local MVFR possible. Slight chance SHRA.
Monday Night: VFR. NO SIG WX.
Tuesday: VFR. Slight chance SHRA.
Tuesday Night: VFR. Slight chance SHRA.
Wednesday: VFR. Slight chance SHRA.

&&

.BTV WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
VT...None.
NY...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Neiles
NEAR TERM...Lahiff/Neiles
SHORT TERM...Haynes
LONG TERM...Haynes
AVIATION...Taber
