FXUS62 KKEY 231835
AFDKEY

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Key West FL
235 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...New DISCUSSION, MARINE, AVIATION...

.DISCUSSION...
Issued at 151 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022
A delightfully quiet afternoon across the Keys. Northeast breezes
continue to bathe the island chain in near normal high 
temperatures and below normal humidity. The marine platforms are 
averaging 7 to 14 knots, while temperatures across the island 
chain are in the lower 80s. The KBYX radar is echo free aside from
a few showers along a weak baroclinic zone in the distant 
Straits. 

.FORECAST...
The stretch of fair weather will continue across the Florida Keys
for the next week. Mean layer ridging rooted near Mexico and the
western Gulf will fend off two attempts at Gulf Coast clippers,
instead shunting them northeast into the Ohio River Valley. Both
of these systems will orphan their cold fronts, which will go to
die over the Gulf. At the surface, high pressure will steadily sag
southward into Florida and the Keys over the next few days.
Although not as strong as the past several days, northeast breezes
will surge again tonight and Monday night, followed by diminished
breezes Tuesday through Thursday night. The light nocturnal
breezes will allow for radiational cooling to near the dewpoint
(~70 degF) for the larger islands and portions of the western-
most Lower Keys. Gentle northeast to east breezes will return
Friday and Friday night. Per rain chances, the vertical profile
will remain very dry and stable. A meager moisture surge with the
first of the relic fronts over the Gulf will wash into the Keys
Thursday and Thursday night, so we added a slight rain chance. 
Thereafter, leaning on climatology, we hold onto the slight rain 
chances, noting very few mechanisms for showers. 

&&

.MARINE...
Issued at 151 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022
There are no watches, warnings, or advisories currently in effect
for the coastal waters of the Florida Keys. Small Craft Should
Exercise Caution across the Straits of Florida due to northeast to
east winds peaking at 15 to 20 knots. From synopsis, high 
pressure over the Southeast United States and northern Florida 
will support gentle to moderate breezes tonight through Monday 
night. Breezes will diminish Tuesday and Tuesday night as high 
pressure nestles across South Florida and the Keys. Gentle to 
moderate breezes will return Friday and Friday night. Rain showers
over the next five days will be minimal.

&&

.AVIATION...
(18Z TAFS)
Issued at 151 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022
VFR and dry conditions will prevail at EYW and MTH through the TAF 
period (23-24/18Z). Northeast surface winds will be 7 to 11 knots 
with a few higher gusts 14 to 17 knots through early this evening, 
then decrease slightly to 6 to 8 knots tonight. A slight increase in 
the northeast winds may occur again tomorrow morning by 24/10Z. 

&&

.CLIMATE...On this day in 2005, a violent waterspout passed just
west of Key West in the outermost rainband of approaching 
Hurricane Wilma.

&&

.KEY WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
FL...None.
GM...None.
&&

$$

Public/Marine/Fire...CLR
Aviation/Nowcasts....JR
Data Acquisition.....DR

Visit us on the web at weather.gov/key

Follow us on Facebook and Twitter at:
www.facebook.com/nwskeywest
www.twitter.com/nwskeywest
