FXAK68 PAFC 220047
AFDAFC

Southcentral and Southwest Alaska Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Anchorage AK
447 PM AKDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.ANALYSIS AND UPPER LEVELS...

The jet stream continues to stretch near the Aleutians and south
towards the Pacific Northwest. This will keep the storm track near
the Aleutians and into the southern Gulf over the next couple of 
days.

Satellite shows a low pressure system southeast of Cordova this is
producing light snow across the Copper River Basin with snow
accumulations up to 2 inches observed. This is also producing a
few showers across eastern Prince William Sound towards Cordova
and Valdez. Fog and stratus observed this morning across northern
Cook Inlet to west Anchorage and the MATSU valleys will slowly 
lift and burn off by this afternoon.

Across the southwest a weak shortwave is moving across Bristol Bay
producing a few showers. 

Meanwhile a surface with supporting upper level shortwave is
spinning south of the western and central Aleutians bringing
clouds and light rain to parts of the Aleutians today.

Over the Bering, westerly flow continues along with colder
temperatures aloft flowing over the relatively warm water surface
of the Bering. This is resulting in lots of cumulus clouds due to
the unstable atmospheric profile this is creating. Some of these 
clouds will grow tall enough to produce showers.

&&

.MODEL DISCUSSION...

Model guidance remains in good agreement with the synoptic scale 
features out through Day 3 (Monday). There are some minor
differences on the placement of two low pressure systems moving 
across the Bering Sunday and Monday. The impacts of the second low
on Monday into Tuesday are expected to be minimal regardless of 
the track as any potential storm surge/ high surf will coincide 
with the New Moon so tides will be lower.

&&

.AVIATION...

PANC...VFR conditions expected through tonight, however fog and 
stratus may redevelop again towards tomorrow morning with IFR or 
lower conditions possible. Light winds are expected to persist 
throughout the TAF package.

&&

.SHORT TERM FORECAST SOUTHCENTRAL ALASKA (Days 1 through 
3/Tonight through Monday night)...

The last vestiges of snow will come to an end across eastern 
portions of the Copper River Basin tonight as a shortwave trough 
departs the region into Canada. This will leave the rest of 
Southcentral dry through the next few days. Cold air advection 
behind the trough will maintain gusty conditions through the gaps 
and passes through the evening hours from Seward to Whittier as 
air drains into Western Prince William Sound. Gusts ranging from 
20 to 30 knots will gradually taper off tonight through early 
Saturday morning. Accelerated winds are also spilling out of the 
Western Alaska Range into Cook Inlet and the Shelikof Strait. Gust
of 20 to 25 knots will stretch across the Barren Islands with a 
core of westerly gales spanning zone 351. These winds too will 
gradually diminish through early Saturday as the pressure gradient
eventually relaxes.

The next upper low moves into the western Gulf late Saturday. 
Gales are forecast to expand in coverage across the southern and 
central Gulf while the low takes a more southerly track through 
the region. While the strongest winds will likely remain well 
offshore of coastal areas, Kodiak Island could see some northerly 
gale force gusts Saturday night. More notable, the isallobaric 
wind component of the low is expected to promote northwest to 
westerly storm force winds over southern portions of zone 352 
early Sunday morning. Corresponding seas may approach 20 feet as a
result.

Otherwise, drier and clearer conditions across Southcentral will 
result in cooler nights. Overnight lows for areas inland of the 
coast will be in the teens to upper 20's through early next week. 
A threat for fog will again develop during the morning hours on 
Saturday from the Kenai Peninsula up into the Mat-Su.

&&

.SHORT TERM FORECAST SOUTHWEST ALASKA (Days 1 through 3)...

Expect onshore flow to persist this forecast period. A low from
the North Pacific is moving toward the Alaska Peninsula and
Bristol Bay and will reach the area Saturday morning. This low's 
trajectory will keep most of the moisture south of Levelock and 
the low is will be south of Kodiak by Saturday evening. Expect a 
lull in activity and then a second fast moving low will push 
across the Bering. The leading edge of the precipitation shield 
will be at Nunivak and Cape Newenham by Sunday evening. The 
dynamics are not impressive with this second low but it will bring
light showers into Monday. 

&&

.SHORT TERM FORECAST BERING SEA/ALEUTIANS (Days 1 through 3)...

A large upper level low continues persists over eastern Russia 
and the Bering this afternoon. At 500 mb there is an oblong shaped 
closed low near Kamchatka and there are multiple shortwaves 
propagating around this upper low through zonal flow. On 
satellite imagery (CIMSS MIMIC PW) there is a deep fetch of 
moisture south of the Aleutians that extends all the way to the 
Philippines. Also on satellite imagery (AMSR2) sampled rain rates 
are as high as .50 of an inch per hour south of Adak. Dutch Harbor
to the Alaska Peninsula will get heavy rain this weekend. 
Additionally, there are a couple of weak surface lows that will 
sustain light showers over portions of the Bering. Late Saturday, 
a second system will approach the Western Aleutians but the 
surface low is only 1004 mb and it doesn't look as organized but 
it will bring showers to the chain.

&&

.LONG TERM FORECAST (Days 4 through 7/Tuesday through Friday)...

Transient upper level ridging will extend across Southcentral and
Southwest Alaska on Tuesday. This ridging will be shortly lived as
deep upper level troughing will move over Southcentral and
Southwest Alaska on Wednesday and persist through Friday. The odds
show a moderate to strong tilt in favor of colder than normal
temperatures and a slight to moderate tilt towards above normal
precipitation for the extended period. 

During this time, a low pressure system is forecast to move
southeastward from over the Bering Sea, across Southwest Alaska
and into the Gulf of Alaska Tuesday and Wednesday, then exit to
the east on Thursday. The southerly track of this storm with
respect to the Alaskan mainland will help reinforce the cold air
and allow for snow to be the most likely precipitation type across
the area. There is low confidence at this time to the exact
precipitation type for coastal areas at this time. With respect to
those areas, a farther off shore track (farther south) would
increase the probability for snow and a more inland track
(northerly track) would decrease the probability for snow and
increase the probability for rain. The track of this low is also
likely to result in strong winds through the Valdez Narrows on
Wednesday due to strong northeast to southwest pressure gradients. 

&&

.AFC WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
PUBLIC...NONE.
MARINE...Gale 131 132 150 155 172 174-178.
FIRE WEATHER...NONE.

&&$$

SYNOPSIS AND MODEL DISCUSSION...RC
SOUTHCENTRAL ALASKA...BL
SOUTHWEST ALASKA/BERING SEA/ALEUTIANS...PJS
LONG TERM...ED
