FXUS61 KBOX 231957
AFDBOX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Boston/Norton MA
357 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
A coastal low and its associated warm front will lead to rain 
overspreading the entire region this evening and overnight. More 
showers, locally heavy are expected Monday, as the front moves into 
the region, then tapering off Monday night. Above normal 
temperatures expected for much of the region during the week ahead, 
before cooling down Friday into this weekend. In addition, 
unsettled weather provides periods of off and on rain through 
midweek before drier weather arrives for the latter part of the 
week into the weekend. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM MONDAY MORNING/...

4 PM Update:

Deep mid/upper level trough along the eastern seaboard, with 
subtropical moisture streaming into SNE tonight and Monday, with 
PWATs up to 250% of normal. This will yield a steady rain developing 
tonight, as mid level warm front lifts thru the region. Some 
instability aloft (negative showalter), which will result in 
isolated thunder but more importantly enhance rainfall rates. Thus, 
could be areas of poor drainage/urban flooding, especially toward 
Monday morning. Not much temp change overnight, given northeast 
winds and precip, with lows 50-55, upper 40s western-central MA. 

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM MONDAY MORNING THROUGH MONDAY NIGHT/...

4 PM update...

Monday...

Rain becomes more showery, as mid level warm lifts into northern New 
England. Heavy showers at times, as deep moist SSW flow into SNE 
continues, with PWATs up to 250% of normal along with elevated 
instability. Rainfall totals of 0.5 to 1.5 inches is expected, but 
low probability of isolated 3-4" if convective showers train over 
the same areas. Difficult to say where axis of heaviest rainfall is 
likely, given convective origins of precip. However, with inverted 
trough over eastern CT into RI and central-eastern MA, along with 
highest PWATs in this area, this may be the region of greatest risk 
for any minor poor drainage flooding Monday. 

Lows will range from upper 40s interior to mid 50s near the 
coast tonight. The inverted trough/warm front is expected to 
move west into the coastal plain Mon. Temps in the warm sector 
likely to spike into the upper 60s across portions of SE MA and
RI with dewpoints low/mid 60s. On the cool side of the boundary, 
temps will reach mid 50s to lower 60s. highs 60-65, except 55-60 
western-central MA. 

Monday night...

Mid/upper trough deamplifies and western Atlantic ridge builds 
westward, with mid level flow becoming more anticyclonic. Thus, 
showers transition more to spotty low top showers and drizzle. Mild 
with lows only in the 50s. Light NE/SE winds. 

&&

.LONG TERM /TUESDAY THROUGH SUNDAY/...

4 PM update...

Highlights...

* Unsettled weather continues through Wednesday before drier weather 
  arrives Thursday into the weekend. 

* Warmer than average temperatures continue through Thursday 
  followed by a cooldown Friday. 
  
Details...

Tuesday and Wednesday...

Unsettled weather with periodic rain chances and warmer than average 
temperatures continues through mid week. This comes courtesy of our 
placement on the downstream periphery of a deep mid level trough 
that moves from the midwest into the mid-Atlantic on Wednesday then 
deamplifies and lifts north over New England Wednesday night. Out 
ahead of this feature a plume of tropical moisture with precipitable 
water values of 1-1.5 inches is entrenched over the region. So, as a 
few weak disturbances move through the mid level flow this will 
allow for off-and-on shower chances through the day on Tuesday. By 
Wednesday as the mid level trough approaches two surface lows (one 
beneath the trough and another moving up the coast) will phase and 
provide additional forcing for ascent with a warm and cold front one 
after the other. Thus, expecting better rain coverage on 
Wednesday/Wednesday night, but where it will set up remains to be 
seen with later updates. Temperature-wise, given the combination of 
warm 850 mb temps of 12-14C and yet cloudy/periodically rainy 
conditions, high temperatures should settle around the mid/upper 60s 
to near 70 each day. 

Thursday through Sunday...

Thursday we transition to a drier pattern as the drier, cooler post 
frontal airmass moves overhead along with more zonal flow. We'll 
have one more day of warm temperatures on Thursday; even though the 
airmass overhead will be cooler, drier air will allow for full sun 
and highs back into the upper 60s. High pressure moves overhead as 
we go into the weekend which will keep the weather dry and pleasant, 
with temperatures topping out in the 50s and low 60s. This is right 
around normal for late October.

&&

.AVIATION /20Z SUNDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Forecaster Confidence Levels:

Low - less than 30 percent. 
Medium - 30 to 60 percent. 
High - greater than 60 percent.

18z TAF update...high confidence on trends, some uncertainty on
exact timing. 

Thru 00z...

Rain shield along the south coast at 18z, slowly advances
northward, although mainly VFR conditions will accompany the
rain. Light NE winds, except 15-20 kt along the south coast and
and islands. 

Tonight...

Rain becomes widespread and moderate to heavy at times. Rain
transitions to become more showery overnight. Still heavy
downpours possible. VFR/MVFR at 00z, steadily lowers overnight
to IFR/LIFR in areas of fog and rain. NE winds shift to SE 
over Cape/Islands overnight with wind shift to S/SE across RI/SE
MA during Mon. 

Monday...

Widespread IFR/LIFR in showers with locally heavy downpours, and
areas of fog. Light N-NE winds, except SE across Cape Cod and
Islands. 

Monday night...

Threat of heavy rain lifts into northern New England. However
widespread IFR/LIFR will persist, although possibly some
improvement overnight across Cape Cod and Islands. Light N-NE
winds continue, except SE over Cape Cod and Islands. 

KBOS Terminal...High confidence in trends...lower in timing.
Cigs and vsbys will lower to MVFR after 23z then IFR by 03z as 
rain overspreads region. LIFR cigs possible Monday morning. 

KBDL Terminal...High confidence in trends...lower in timing.
Cigs and vsbys lowering to MVFR by 00z then IFR after 05z as 
rain overspreads region.

Outlook /Tuesday through Friday/... 

Tuesday: Mainly MVFR, with areas VFR possible. Slight chance
SHRA.

Tuesday Night through Wednesday: Mainly MVFR, with areas IFR
possible. Chance SHRA.

Wednesday Night: MVFR/IFR conditions possible. Slight chance
SHRA.

Thursday through Friday: VFR. Breezy. 

&&

.MARINE...
Forecaster Confidence Levels:

Low - less than 30 percent. 
Medium - 30 to 60 percent. 
High - greater than 60 percent.

4 pm update...

Tonight...

Weak low pres off the Mid Atlc and high pressure over the maritimes, 
will yield light NE/SE winds. Rain, heavy at times along with areas 
of fog will limit vsby. Isolated thunder possible late. 

Monday...

Very little change, with light NE/SE winds. Rain becomes more 
showery, but isolated thunderstorms with very heavy rain possible. 

Monday night...

Flow remains light and becomes more easterly. Scattered heavy 
showers transition to more drizzle, along with poor vsby.

Outlook /Tuesday through Friday/...

Tuesday: Winds less than 25 kt. Seas locally approaching 5 ft.
Slight chance of rain showers. 

Tuesday Night: Winds less than 25 kt. Areas of seas approaching
5 ft. Chance of rain showers. 

Wednesday: Winds less than 25 kt. Seas up to 5 ft. Chance of
rain showers. 

Wednesday Night: Winds less than 25 kt. Seas up to 5 ft. Slight
chance of rain showers. 

Thursday: Winds less than 25 kt. Areas of seas approaching
5 ft. 

Thursday Night through Friday: Low risk for Small Craft
Advisory winds with gusts up to 25 kt. Seas up to 5 ft. 

&&

.BOX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CT...None.
MA...None.
RI...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory until 8 PM EDT this evening for 
     ANZ231>234-236.
     Small Craft Advisory until 2 AM EDT Monday for ANZ235-237.
     Small Craft Advisory until 2 PM EDT Monday for ANZ250-251-
     254>256.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Nocera/BW
NEAR TERM...Nocera
SHORT TERM...Nocera
LONG TERM...BW
AVIATION...Nocera/BW
MARINE...Nocera/BW
