FXUS62 KCHS 212312
AFDCHS

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Charleston SC
712 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
Dry high pressure will remain over the area through next
Tuesday. A cold front could move through mid week. 

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 6 AM SATURDAY MORNING/...
High pressure will prevail at the surface while aloft a deep
trough digs across the eastern United States. The atmosphere is
extremely dry, as shown in GOES water vapor imagery as well as
the 12 Z CHS RAOB sounding. This morning's sounding had a PWAT
value of 0.35 inches, well below average for this time of year.
With plentiful sunshine temperatures were able to reach 70 in
many locations across the area. 

Temperatures will quickly drop off after sunset as the boundary
layer decouples and radiational cooling commences. Light winds
and clear skies will allow temperatures to drop into the upper
30s inland with upper 40s to low 50s along the coastline. A
shortwave aloft will pass over the region through the overnight
hours, keeping winds over land areas from going completely calm.

&&

.SHORT TERM /6 AM SATURDAY MORNING THROUGH MONDAY/...
Aloft, low pressure will meander across the Atlantic before shifting 
northward on Sunday. At the surface, high pressure will prevail 
across land areas with an area of weak low pressure situated far 
offshore. The majority of the period will consist of dry weather and 
a plethora of sunshine. Although, a few showers could 
approach/linger across the waters through the weekend due to 
increased moisture. Otherwise, a warming trend will ensue. High 
temperatures on Saturday are forecast in the 70s then a few degrees 
warmer each day thereafter. For low temperatures, a few isolated 
spots inland could linger in the upper 40s on Saturday night but the 
majority of the area should see lows in the 50s with 60s just along 
the immediate coast.

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH FRIDAY/...
High pressure will prevail into Tuesday then retreat as an upper-
level trough and cold front approach. By late Wednesday, the cold 
front will shift across the region and offshore as the upper trough 
to the north shifts east. At this time, the forecast remains mostly 
dry through the period as any showers that do form will need to 
overcome extensive drier air. Although, there could be a few showers 
just offshore and they could brush the beaches. High temperatures 
will be in the mid 70s to mid 80s with lows in the mid 50s to mid 
60s.

&&

.AVIATION /00Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
VFR conditions will prevail at KCHS, KJZI, and KSAV through 00Z
Sunday. An upper level disturbance currently off the coast of 
SC will continue to rotate just east of the region with clouds 
currently across southeast NC oozing southwest tomorrow morning.
Most of the cloud cover over NC is currently in the 5 to 6kft 
range and this is what is forecast for Saturday. Winds will be 
out of the northeast 5 kts in the morning increasing to around 
10 kts in the afternoon. Transient wind gusts around 15 kts 
Saturday afternoon. The late morning/ early afternoon clouds 
will rotate southwest through the period.

Extended Aviation Outlook: VFR.

&&

.MARINE...
Tonight: A shortwave trough aloft will pass over the region, associated
with a developing low pressure to our east. High pressure will
continue to build inland, creating a pinched pressure gradient
along the local waters. North to northeasterly winds will
increase to 10 to 15 knots with gusts to around 20 knots. Seas
are forecast to build to 2 to 4 feet. 

Saturday through Wednesday: Inland high pressure and low pressure 
offshore will lead to an enhanced pressure gradient across the 
waters through early next week. A Small Craft Advisory has been 
issued for the outer Georgia waters beginning mid-morning Saturday. 
Thereafter, the Charleston County waters (winds&seas) and the 
Charleston Harbor(winds) will likely reach SCA criteria. For the 
nearshore SC/GA waters, winds should remain below 25 knots and seas 
less than 5 feet. Although, if the gradient becomes more pinched, 
Small Craft Advisories could eventually be needed. By late Sunday, 
north to northeast winds should subdue. Although, seas could linger 
around 4-6 feet through Monday afternoon.

&&

.CHS WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
GA...None.
SC...None.
MARINE...Small Craft Advisory from 11 AM Saturday to 4 PM EDT Monday 
     for AMZ374.

&&

$$

NEAR TERM...Haines
SHORT TERM...
LONG TERM...
AVIATION...Haines
MARINE...
