FXUS62 KCAE 220003
AFDCAE

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Columbia SC
803 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure and dry air will continue dominating the region 
into early next week. Temperatures will again remain below 
normal today with a slight warming trend bringing values back 
to near normal early next week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY/...
Tonight: Strong radiational cooling conditions are expected 
with clear skies, calm winds and a continued dry air mass. Upper
heights will be rising slightly overnight as the upper trough 
axis shifts offshore which may negatively impact cooling but 
still think temperatures will be on the cooler side of guidance 
and have forecast lows in the mid to upper 30s. Lately, guidance
has been too cool on the previous strong radiational cooling 
nights.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SATURDAY NIGHT THROUGH SUNDAY NIGHT/...
Closed upper low will develop offshore the SE US coast and drift
slowly north to eastern NC and into the the Mid Atlantic coast.
A pair of surface lows will develop offshore along an old front
over the Gulf Stream and track north towards the Mid Atlantic 
and NE coast. Shallow low level wrap around moisture expected to
bring some cloudiness and light precipitation into the Eastern 
Carolinas, mainly eastern NC, Saturday night and Sunday. Latest
guidance consensus suggests any rainfall should stay mainly 
east of our forecast area (FA). Temperatures expected to 
continue gradually moderating over the weekend closer to normal 
values for mid/late October.

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Upper troughiness to develop over the Western and Central CONUS, 
with slightly positive upper height anomalies returning for our 
region for the beginning of next week. Another upper closed low
progged to develop off the east coast of FL/Bahamas region mid 
to late week and then shift east. This system may allow some 
moisture increase for our region. That, along with the approach 
of a weak surface boundary associated with a trough/closed low
approaching from the west could possibly provide some small 
POPs for our region mid to late week. At this time have kept our
forecast dry through the period. Temperatures are expected to
continue moderate through the period and will be close to 
normal/slightly above normal from mid through the remainder of 
the period.

&&

.AVIATION /00Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
VFR conditions will prevail through 00Z Sunday. 

Surface high pressure anchored over the region will result in calm
winds and clear skies through tonight. Fog is not expected to be
much of an issue due to low cross-over temperatures, but brief 
restrictions at KOGB/KAGS is possible due to the nearby
influence of the rivers. 

Moisture advecting in from the Atlantic may produce a few mid 
level clouds Saturday afternoon, but no ceilings anticipated. 
Winds will increase to around 5 kt from the ENE late Saturday 
morning into the afternoon. 

&&

.CAE WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
GA...None.
SC...None.

&&

$$
