FXUS63 KLMK 231715
AFDLMK

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Louisville KY
115 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Updated Aviation Discussion...

.Forecast Update...
Issued at 1010 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

As the mid-level shortwave energy moves out of the forecast area this 
morning, expect clearer skies and rising surface high pressure. Max 
temperatures today should reach the mid-to-upper 70s with urban 
areas probably breaking into the low 80s. Regional radar shows 
isolated showers moving from Missouri to Illinois given the theta-e 
advection regime accompanying the LLJ; however, that activity will 
stay well away from southern Indiana so a dry forecast is favored 
for the rest of the day. Gusty southerly winds will begin this 
afternoon which combined with a dry airmass (RH in the 30s) and low 
10-hr fuel moisture (7-10 %) will account for an increased fire 
weather concern.

&&

.Short Term...(This evening through Monday)
Issued at 300 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Upper level shortwave overhead has resulted in quite a bit of high 
cloud cover very early this morning. With the shortwave lifting 
northeast this morning, expect cloud cover to move out around 
sunrise as well. Synoptic overview indicates the well-advertised 
subtropical jet over the SW United States will phase with the deep 
PNW trough today. With a stacked low residing over western Nebraska 
today, a large warm sector will feature strong low level jetting, 
with the core of SW winds ranging from 35-55kts across a region 
stretching from Texas to Illinois. With a sfc high located over 
Georgia today, reinforcing warm return flow will aid in above normal 
temps for us. Additionally, tightening sfc pressure gradient and 
momentum transfer will result in breezy southerly winds this 
afternoon mainly along and west of I-65, with gusts generally 
between 15-25 mph. 

Expect temps this afternoon to warm into the upper 70s and near 80 
once again today. Better moisture fetch broad-brushed across the 
region today should help keep dewpoints a tad higher today, and min 
RH values are forecast to remain in the 30s today. Though given the 
ongoing moderate drought conditions and breezy conditions, any fires 
that develop will be difficult to control. Any outdoor burning 
should be postponed until conditions improve. Obey all local burn 
bans.

Mid and high level clouds will begin to advect into the region from 
the SW by late this afternoon and evening hours ahead of the stacked 
low over the Plains. Continued WAA pattern will aid in another mild 
night, with Monday morning lows only getting down into the upper 40s 
and low 50s.

&&

.Long Term...(Monday night through Sunday)
Issued at 245 AM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Have one more fairly persistent forecast day for Monday, with 
temperatures near record highs (Side note: the 82 degree record at 
SDF is one of the "coolest" records...or easiest to break...for the 
month of October). We'll have steady south to southeasterly wind 
flow and similar low-level thicknesses. Given we got into the upper 
70s to 80 at SDF Saturday, this record looks quite reachable...but 
for now will keep it just under. Will be going about a degree above 
mean model guidance and above the NBM starting point by 2-3 degrees. 

Come Tuesday, we start to tap into some tropical moisture from the 
remnants of Hurricane Roslyn, making landfall over Mexico soon. GOES 
sounder data already has a channel of higher value, around 1 inch, 
currently running from eastern Iowa south to Arkansas and then 
southwest into Texas. A couple of upper-level troughs, currently 
over the western U.S. and west of the Baja Peninsula, will merge 
over western Texas Monday. Flow east of these systems will serve as 
the tap mentioned above to pump that moisture northward quickly. By 
Tuesday morning, this combined system should likely will be riding 
east northeast somewhere in the OK/TX Red River border 
region...making it to the MO Bootheel vicinity by Tuesday evening. 
Model ensemble consensus is fairly uniform on this feature, with 
only it's speed in question.

A surface reflection of this system will drag a cold front into the 
area late Tuesday/early Wednesday. Forecast precipitable waters have 
trended upward, with ensembles averaging in the 1.25-1.5 inch range, 
whereas the deterministic GFS and NAM go more like 1.6-1.8 inches in 
our area by 00Z Wed. Given the tropical nature of this tap, would 
lean more towards that higher value. The problem for us, as far as 
getting soaking rains from this system, is that instability looks 
really weak over our region, despite having the core of the low 
pressure moving up the Ohio River Wednesday morning. This makes for 
a challenge pegging how much rain we'll get. Previous forecast had 
total precip of a third of an inch to an inch across the region, and 
with this suite of model guidance trending upward with higher 
precipitable waters...and given the tropical nature of this 
moisture, will bump QPF up some...peaking average values around 1.5 
inches in our western counties. The phrase "when in drought, leave 
it out" comes to mind for rain chances...but it's hard to argue with 
the moisture feed coming our way.

After that wave passes us by on Wednesday, the rest of the work week 
looks quiet, though we do return fairly quickly to a southwest flow 
aloft by Friday. Temperatures should drop back to a little below 
normal Wednesday and bounce back to near normal by Friday. 

By late Friday into Saturday, model spread is fairly large for 
another trough/closed low moving across the Southern Plains/Deep 
South. NBM forecast brings in slight chance (20) to chance (30) pops 
to the region for this period, and see no good reason to deviate 
here.

&&

.Aviation...(18Z TAF Issuance)
Issued at 115 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Impacts/Confidence:
- High confidence on gusty southerly winds today and tomorrow 
afternoon.

Discussion...VFR category will prevail during this TAF cycle at all 
terminals. Currently, surface high pressure ridge and dry air extend 
across the lower Ohio Valley while a low pressure moves towards the 
northern Plains. This setting will allow breezy conditions each 
afternoon with upper-level clouds advecting from the west later 
tonight. Going beyond TAF time, it seems there is a slight chance of 
MVFR conditions on Tuesday with a frontal passage.

&&

.LMK WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IN...None.
KY...None.
&&

$$

Update...ALL
Short Term...CJP
Long Term...RJS
Aviation...ALL
