FXUS63 KJKL 231726
AFDJKL

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Jackson KY
126 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1005 AM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

Didn't make a whole lot of changes to the grids as the forecast
has remained on track. Just loaded in the latest surface
observations and cleaned up the transitions. Then generated new
text products before sending grids to NDFD and webfarms.

UPDATE Issued at 710 AM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

High clouds have mostly moved off to the northeast early this
morning in response to a departing mid level impulse. Accordingly,
have updated the forecast to fine tune the Sky/T/Td grids with the
latest obs and trends. These updates have been sent to the NDFD
and web servers. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Monday)
Issued at 445 AM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

08Z sfc analysis shows high pressure holding on to the east of
Kentucky with low pressure found to the west. This has set up a
relaxed pressure gradient through eastern Kentucky resulting in
light south to southwest winds. Although a passing mid level 
impulse is pushing some variably thick high clouds through the 
area early this morning, the ridge to valley temperature split is
still pretty large. Readings currently range from the upper 50s 
on the hilltops to the low and mid 40s in the most sheltered 
spots. Meanwhile, dewpoints are running in the mid to upper 40s. 
Again, the overall dryness of the air, and passing clouds, are 
keeping the valley fog to a minimum early this morning. 

The models remain in relatively good agreement aloft through the
short term portion of the forecast. They all depict ridging
building over eastern Kentucky through Monday in the wake of the
weak wave passing this morning. This ridge becomes briefly strong
in response to a deep diving trough over northern Texas Monday
evening. The GFS has this 5h wave a tad slower and further south 
than the ECMWF. Closer to home, the pattern is more similar among
the models with limited spread supporting the use of the blended 
NBM as the starting point for the forecast grids, though again 
with some dry adjustments necessary. 

Sensible weather will feature an extended period of pleasant but
very dry weather into the start of the new work week. This will
mean above normal temperatures each afternoon with humidities
bottoming out in the 25 to 30 percent range. This level of dryness
will continue to support a higher than usual risk for fires,
though, thankfully, the winds being relatively light will limit
the overall concern for erratic fire behavior. At night we will
continue to see a rather large ridge to valley temperature spread
and limited fog development. 

Again made the most adjustments to overnight temperatures and
afternoon dewpoints from the NBM starting point - favoring the 10
percent portion of the PDF for those dewpoints. The PoPs remain
virtually zero through the period and needed no adjustment. 

.LONG TERM...(Monday night through Saturday)
Issued at 355 AM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

The primary player in the extended will be a fast moving area of
low pressure that is forecast to race across the region Tuesday
night through Wednesday. This system could bring brief periods of
locally heavy rainfall to a few locations, but all and all we
should just see a quick shot of beneficial rain across most of the
area. A second area of low pressure may bring another round of
rain to eastern Kentucky going into next weekend. After a day of
above normal temperatures in the mid to upper 70s on Tuesday, a
couple of rounds of cooler air should spill into the area behind
the two departing areas of low pressure mentioned previously.
Highs Wednesday and Thursday will range from the upper 50s to the
mid 60s. A bit of a warm up is again expected Friday and Saturday,
as winds shift around to the east or southeast, leading to a bit
of downslope warming. Nightly lows should mainly be in the 40s
around the area.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
ISSUED AT 125 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

VFR conditions will continue through the TAF period. Sky coverage
and CIG impacts are minimal as a few passing high clouds are 
possible. Also, winds are forecast to remain light and variable 
with little impacts to any terminals.

&&

.JKL WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NONE.
&&

$$

UPDATE...VORST
SHORT TERM...GREIF
LONG TERM...AR
AVIATION...VORST
