FXUS63 KLMK 231907
AFDLMK

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Louisville KY
307 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.Short Term...(This evening through Monday)
Issued at 305 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Synopsis...Mid-level longwave trough dropping from the Pacific 
Northwest will absorb the Baja closed low and the remaining energy 
from Hurricane Roslyn to further amplify over the Central US while 
it pushes a cold front through the Mississippi Valley. In the 
meantime, surface high pressure and elongated shortwave ridge will 
be situated over the Southeast US and into the Ohio Valley. This 
synoptic pattern will account for strong strong low-level jetting 
and warm-air advection ahead of the front. 

Highlights...Southern Indiana and Central Kentucky are experiencing 
clear skies with area-wide temperatures in the mid to upper 70s. As 
expected, southerly wind gusts have manifested in the 15-20 mph 
range this afternoon with higher and more frequent gusts towards the 
western southern Indiana counties due to the closer proximity to the 
jet core. For tonight, winds will stay light and from the south as 
temperatures run above-average. Moreover, a batch of mid and upper-
level clouds will move in from the west and eventually increase in 
coverage late Monday morning/afternoon ahead of the front. Depending 
on the sky cover fraction and the type of clouds, Monday max temps 
can fluctuate by a couple of degrees. So far, loaded the NBM 75th 
percentile for that parameter which has SDF at 81 degF (1 degF short 
from tying the previous record). Another parameter modified with 
this package was the dewpoint. Forecast soundings and CAM guidance 
indicate that a drier low-level airmass will be advected from the 
south; thus, relative humidity values on Monday afternoon could fall 
into the 25-30 percent range. Taking into account low 10-hr fuel 
moisture and gusty winds, fire weather concerns are still valid for 
tomorrow.

&&

.Long Term...(Monday night through Sunday)
Issued at 258 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Rain still in the forecast, but likely not a drought-buster...

A slowly weakening slightly negatively tilted upper trough will 
sweep into the mid-Mississippi Valley Tuesday while the surface low 
proceeds from the Ozarks to southern Illinois. A corridor of 
increased moisture, primarily in the mid levels at first but 
eventually saturating through much of the column, will enter the 
area as the system's cold front approaches by Tuesday evening. As a 
result, a north-south band of showers will move in from the west by 
Tuesday afternoon and proceed eastward across the region Tuesday 
night while slowly weakening. It will be an autumn high shear/low 
CAPE set-up with very little instability and weak mid-level lapse 
rates. Better chances for stronger storms will be to our south in a 
region of greater buoyancy. This is a good thing for us, as 
hopefully we can get some beneficial rains without much of a severe 
threat. As for rainfall, amounts have backed off a bit, and there is 
some concern that the numbers in the current forecast may be a bit 
on the high side given the dry pattern we are in, recent events that 
have ended up drier than forecast, and a weakening of the moisture 
transport as the system pushes eastward. For now, we have half an 
inch to an inch west of I-65 and a third to a half inch east.

Wednesday through Friday high pressure will strengthen and advance 
from the mid-Missouri Valley to the Saint Lawrence Seaway. This will 
provide us with a return to dry conditions and roughly seasonal 
temperatures. 

This weekend the next upper trough will approach from the west. This 
may introduce a few showers to the region, but any rain should be 
light. Tuesday is by far the best shot at meaningful rain over the 
next seven days, as it appears at this time.

&&

.Aviation...(18Z TAF Issuance)
Issued at 115 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Impacts/Confidence:
- High confidence on gusty southerly winds today and tomorrow 
afternoon.

Discussion...VFR category will prevail during this TAF cycle at all 
terminals. Currently, surface high pressure ridge and dry air extend 
across the lower Ohio Valley while a low pressure moves towards the 
northern Plains. This setting will allow breezy conditions each 
afternoon with upper-level clouds advecting from the west later 
tonight. Going beyond TAF time, it seems there is a slight chance of 
MVFR conditions on Tuesday with a frontal passage.

&&

.LMK WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IN...None.
KY...None.
&&

$$

Short Term...ALL
Long Term...13
Aviation...ALL
