FXUS63 KPAH 231718
AFDPAH

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Paducah KY
1218 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 1217 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Updated Aviation discussion for the 18z TAF issuance. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Tuesday night)
Issued at 252 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The tight pressure gradient will persist across our region today
as a low pressure system deepens over the Central Plains. As the
low moves northeast through Monday, the associated cold front 
will be slowly pushing toward the middle Mississippi valley. 

For today, south winds will increase to 12 to 18 kts by late 
morning, with gusts of 20 to 25 kts this afternoon across west 
Kentucky and southwest Indiana, and 25 to 30 kts in southeast 
Missouri and southern Illinois. Winds and gusts will only drop 
about 5 to 8 kts tonight, then they will pick back up a little for
Monday. We will also see increasing clouds from west to east 
through the day Monday with the approach of the cold front. 

With the persistent gusty winds, drought conditions and humidity 
levels both today and Monday similar to what we had Saturday, 
elevated fire danger will remain a concern. We will continue with
a Special Weather Statement to highlight the issue.

Temperatures today through Monday will be 10 to 15 degrees above 
normal. Highs both today and Monday will be in the upper 70s to 
lower 80s. Lows tonight will only drop into the middle 50s to 
around 60 degrees.

.LONG TERM...(Wednesday through Saturday)
Issued at 252 AM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Guidance is in good/improving agreement with the synoptic details of 
our approaching Tuesday storm system. Current solutions break the 
base off the longer wave trough currently over the intermountain 
west as it traverses the plains and send a negatively tilted 
shortwave trough over the region during the day Tuesday. This trough 
then starts to close off as it moves overhead Tuesday night. The 
lower atmosphere responds to this trough and a surface low moves 
northeast roughly over the center of the CWA at around 1000 mb. 

This increases surface winds to 15 to 25 mph out of the south- 
southeast during the day Wednesday and lower level winds 
at 850 mb increase to around 50 to 60 kts. Moisture advects in from 
the southwest (Texas/Mexico) over a broad area and appears to be 
significantly enhanced by the injection of eastern Pacific Hurricane 
Roslyn into the column over south Texas. Column precipitable water 
values run from about 1.5 to 1.7 inches in the 00z guidance suite 
which is at or above climo max for the region. 

Modeled mid-level lapse rates are quite poor even under the base of 
the trough Tuesday, which is presumably due to the influence of the 
tropical cyclone. The lapse rates seem a bit low for such strong 
large scale ascent under the negative tilt trough but it has been a 
signal that has been consistent and has resulted in meager 
instability in model soundings despite fairly strong surface 
moisture (dewpoints 60 to 64). I suspect we need to be alert to the 
possibility of local lapse rates being stronger in areas of better 
lift under the shortwave, but in general will nod to the long-term 
trend in the guidance that it will be stable enough to not tap into 
the very favorable/strong low and deep layer shear parameters. 

So long story short, we have good agreement on a lot of large scale 
lift from the trough (DCVA) down to the surface cyclone (surface 
convergence), with warm advection to boot. The column moisture 
should be charged up extra by the influence of an ePac 
hurricane. Rain chances appear as good as you could get in a long 
term drought and have 12 hr pops in the 95% range. The shear is 
quite favorable for severe, but instability is expected to be too 
limited for widespread severe based on limited mid level lapse rates 
(stay tuned). Should see a period of focused and locally heavy 
convective rain Tuesday and some wraparound precip into Tuesday 
night and perhaps early Wednesday. Event total QPF runs from about 
1.3 to 2.1 inches with the higher values in the western half of the 
CWA. 

Beyond that storm, we moderate with ridging building into the north 
with fairly pleasant and seasonable days on tap. A fairly robust 
longer wave trough moves through in the GFS operational model on 
Friday where the ECMWF lags it back and closes it off - moving it 
through on Saturday. The trajectories of flow ahead of the trough in 
both situations don't appear to bring in much in the way of column 
moisture at the surface and aloft and collaborated a drier than NBM 
solution for the forecast with low chance pops spread through Friday 
and Saturday. Will hopefully be able to narrow down a time window a 
bit as the event approaches and its possible the trough will pass 
through without any precip at all.

&&

.AVIATION...
Issued at 1217 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Plentiful mid-level cloud decks of roughly 3-7kft will gradually
mixing out this afternoon, with only high-level cirrus expected
after 0z Monday. Gusty southerly winds will continue through 
tonight, sustained at 10-15 kts with gusts of 20-25+ kts expected.
We'll lose the gustiness overnight, but higher wind speeds and 
gusts will return after 14z Monday. 

&&

.PAH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IL...None.
MO...None.
IN...None.
KY...None.
&&

$$

UPDATE...DWS
SHORT TERM...RST
LONG TERM...JGG
AVIATION...DWS
