FXUS63 KJKL 231918
AFDJKL

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Jackson KY
318 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday night)
Issued at 317 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

High pressure continues to remain overhead with the 1025mb high 
pressure center located to the southeast of the region. This will 
continue to favor the mostly clear skies and warmer, above average 
temperatures.

As a longwave trough continues to dig out of the Western CONUS, 
upper-level ridging will occur across the forecast area for Monday 
into Tuesday. Above average temperatures and dry weather will 
continue as a result of this ridging. Temperatures for tomorrow look 
to be about the same as today with slightly lower dewpoints as the 
southwesterly flow aims to pull drier air into the region. 
Therefore, opted for a 10th percentile NBM with a little blend of 
CONSShort.

As for the end of the period, the synoptic pattern continues to 
provide a look at a pattern change. The low coming out of the 
Rockies today is progged to eject out of the Plains into the 
Northern Plains through Monday morning. However, a secondary 
circulation diving out of the Four Corners is expected eject into 
the southern Plains Monday night into early Tuesday. Overnight 
Tuesday, the closed H5 circulation ejecting out of the southern 
Plains will be on the doorstep of the forecast area. This will bring 
the next chance of wetting rain but unluckily for this forecaster, 
that system will be highlighted by the long-term forecaster.

.LONG TERM...(Monday night through Saturday)
Issued at 355 AM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

The primary player in the extended will be a fast moving area of
low pressure that is forecast to race across the region Tuesday
night through Wednesday. This system could bring brief periods of
locally heavy rainfall to a few locations, but all and all we
should just see a quick shot of beneficial rain across most of the
area. A second area of low pressure may bring another round of
rain to eastern Kentucky going into next weekend. After a day of
above normal temperatures in the mid to upper 70s on Tuesday, a
couple of rounds of cooler air should spill into the area behind
the two departing areas of low pressure mentioned previously.
Highs Wednesday and Thursday will range from the upper 50s to the
mid 60s. A bit of a warm up is again expected Friday and Saturday,
as winds shift around to the east or southeast, leading to a bit
of downslope warming. Nightly lows should mainly be in the 40s
around the area.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
ISSUED AT 125 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

VFR conditions will continue through the TAF period. Sky coverage
and CIG impacts are minimal as a few passing high clouds are 
possible. Also, winds are forecast to remain light and variable 
with little impacts to any terminals.

&&

.JKL WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NONE.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...VORST
LONG TERM...AR
AVIATION...VORST
