FXUS63 KPAH 231944
AFDPAH

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Paducah KY
244 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(Tonight through Tuesday night)
Issued at 242 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Bottom Line Up Front...A strong fall storm will move through the 
Lower Ohio Valley from late Monday night through late Tuesday 
night. This system will bring widespread beneficial rains of 
roughly 0.75 to 1.25" mainly Tuesday morning into Tuesday evening.
An isolated strong or severe storm cannot be ruled out, but the 
current thinking is instability to fuel convection will be very 
limited.

Technical discussion...Tonight through Tuesday, a deep H5 trough
over the southern Rockies will interact with the remnants of
Roslyn. This will advect plentiful tropical moisture into the
mid-levels of the atmosphere. At the surface, low pressure will
develop over the southern Plains and move northeast along a
frontal boundary. By Tuesday evening, a roughly 1000 mb surface
low will be centered across the forecast area. The robust 
dynamics and precipitable water values around 200% of normal 
values will lead to widespread beneficial rains, spreading from 
west to east Tuesday morning through early Tuesday evening, 
respectively. Cannot rule out some localized flooding if training
rainfall occurs, but given the parched ground, the concern for 
flooding is rather low but not zero. Likewise, the severe threat 
looks to be limited but not zero. The very moist environmental 
profile will keep lapse rates low, and, as a result, instability 
values will also be modest, limiting the severe potential. 
However, if instability can develop Tuesday afternoon, the shear 
profiles will be supportive of low topped convection developing, 
with a low wind damage risk and perhaps a brief tornado. 

The rest of the forecast...Tonight will be warm with a steady
southerly wind. Low temperatures will fall into the middle 50s to
lower 60s. Monday will also be warm and breezy, with increasing
clouds in the afternoon. High temperatures will reach the upper
70s to lower 80s with wind gusts of 20-25 mph. We'll again need to
keep an eye on the potential for fire weather concerns, mainly
across west KY into southwest IN, where RH values of 25-35% are
forecast in the afternoon. Tuesday's temperature will be tempered
by rain and clouds, ranging from the middle 60s to lower 70s,
respectively, from west to east. As the system departs Tuesday
night, lows will return to chillier values, in the 40s.


.LONG TERM...(Wednesday through Sunday)
Issued at 242 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Another dry period will be on the way for the PAH forecast area Wed 
through at least Thu night under broad ridging aloft and higher 
surface pressures. The latest deterministic model consensus appears 
to have a low pressure system somewhere in TX by Fri, slowing down 
its forward speed as it separates from the northern stream. 

This system could be responsible for another rain event as early as 
the daytime hours on Fri (mainly west of the MS River) according to 
the NBM model consensus/ensemble means. However, the deterministic 
models suggested, with some timing differences, a later onset of 
measurable rainfall as the system approaches, more like Sat. Thus, 
for now we will go with the highest Pops overall being on Sat as per 
the NBM. Rainfall may linger well into Sun.

Limited time for moist return flow should result in rather low QPF 
with this system. However the mid level low should begin to open up 
into an open wave with time. How quickly this occurs will remain to 
be seen, so there is a possibility of heavier rain amounts over some 
areas. There does not appear to be enough instability for even 
isolated lightning strikes at this time, but this may change as we 
approach next weekend.

Expect temps to be in the vicinity of seasonable averages through 
the extended period, with generally moderate afternoon humidity 
readings, especially later in the period.

&&

.AVIATION...
Issued at 1217 PM CDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Plentiful mid-level cloud decks of roughly 3-7kft will gradually
mixing out this afternoon, with only high-level cirrus expected
after 0z Monday. Gusty southerly winds will continue through 
tonight, sustained at 10-15 kts with gusts of 20-25+ kts expected.
We'll lose the gustiness overnight, but higher wind speeds and 
gusts will return after 14z Monday. 


&&

.PAH WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
IL...None.
MO...None.
IN...None.
KY...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...DWS
LONG TERM...DB
AVIATION...DWS
