FXUS63 KJKL 232010
AFDJKL

AREA FORECAST DISCUSSION
National Weather Service Jackson KY
410 PM EDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday night)
Issued at 317 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

High pressure continues to remain overhead with the 1025mb high 
pressure center located to the southeast of the region. This will 
continue to favor the mostly clear skies and warmer, above average 
temperatures.

As a longwave trough continues to dig out of the Western CONUS, 
upper-level ridging will occur across the forecast area for Monday 
into Tuesday. Above average temperatures and dry weather will 
continue as a result of this ridging. Temperatures for tomorrow look 
to be about the same as today with slightly lower dewpoints as the 
southwesterly flow aims to pull drier air into the region. 
Therefore, opted for a 10th percentile NBM with a little blend of 
CONSShort.

As for the end of the period, the synoptic pattern continues to 
provide a look at a pattern change. The low coming out of the 
Rockies today is progged to eject out of the Plains into the 
Northern Plains through Monday morning. However, a secondary 
circulation diving out of the Four Corners is expected eject into 
the southern Plains Monday night into early Tuesday. Overnight 
Tuesday, the closed H5 circulation ejecting out of the southern 
Plains will be on the doorstep of the forecast area. This will bring 
the next chance of wetting rain but unluckily for this forecaster, 
that system will be highlighted by the long-term forecaster.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Sunday)
Issued at 410 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

Key messages:

* A passing cold front brings a round of showers to the area
  mainly Tuesday night. 

* Slightly below normal temperatures follow for the mid-week.

* Near normal readings with another small chance of rain move in
  for next weekend.

An amplified long wave pattern will remain in place across the 
CONUS through the majority of the period. On Tuesday, a southern 
stream upper level low will swing from the Arklatex region 
through the mid-Mississippi Valley and in to the Ohio Valley 
through early Wednesday morning. At the surface, low pressure will
follow a similar track to its upper level counterpart, with the 
associated cold front to track across eastern Kentucky late 
Tuesday night through early Wednesday morning. Overall, the 
models continue to converge a bit better on timing and track of 
this system, with a quick shot of rain showers moving in Tuesday 
evening/night. Given the increased model confidence, have actually
gone a bit higher than the blended guidance for PoP, with most 
locations seeing at least a quick shot of widespread showers. 
Unfortunately, QPF has not trended up, generally staying just on 
either side of around a quarter of an inch, with locations near 
the Bluegrass and west of I-75 seeing a bit better chance to 
exceed that threshold, and locations further seeing a better 
chance of seeing under that amount. 

Short-lived flatter flow follows on the heels of the exiting 
system for Wednesday night, before another short wave trough cuts 
off and heads southeast from the central Great Basin/Rockies 
region through the Four Corners through Thursday. This feature 
will then head east into the weekend. Ensemble data still shows 
plenty of spread with the evolution of this system, lending to 
lower confidence in the forecast; however, there is an overall 
slower trend to its approach towards our region. As such, did 
undercut and delay PoPs, particularly for the start of the 
weekend. At the surface, high pressure will gradually build from 
the Upper Midwest through the Great Lakes and eventually anchor 
near New England by the end of the period. A broad surface low 
will be tracking along the lower Mississippi Valley and eventually
into the Deep South/Gulf Coast states region. Again, confidence 
is still low on the track of the surface system. 

Sensible weather will feature an increase in clouds for Tuesday,
but not before temperatures rebound into the upper 70s, with a
few spots touching 80, given the dry mid-levels in place. Rain
showers will move in Tuesday evening, with any thunder threat
likely staying just off to our west. These showers will taper off
quickly from southwest to northeast Wednesday morning; however,
some low level moisture looks to get trapped under a post- 
frontal inversion, lending to much cooler highs in the upper 50s 
to lower 60s. These clouds look harder shake into Wednesday night 
as well, keeping lows in the mid to upper 40s for most locations. 
By Thursday, clearing should take hold by the afternoon, as 500 mb
heights recover a bit better. Highs will be in the low to mid 
60s. Mostly clear skies will remain in place Thursday night, 
allowing for a bit cooler readings, generally in the 40 to 45 
degree range. Friday looks to remain dry, with temperatures 
reaching the upper 60s to around 70. Clouds will then generally be
on the increase this weekend, with at least a small chance of 
showers threatening with the eventual approach of the 
aforementioned upstream system. Temperatures will generally 
average near normal. 

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
ISSUED AT 125 PM EDT SUN OCT 23 2022

VFR conditions will continue through the TAF period. Sky coverage
and CIG impacts are minimal as a few passing high clouds are 
possible. Also, winds are forecast to remain light and variable 
with little impacts to any terminals.

&&

.JKL WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
NONE.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...VORST
LONG TERM...GEOGERIAN
AVIATION...VORST
