FXUS66 KLOX 232116
AFDLOX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Los Angeles/Oxnard CA 
216 PM PDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...23/138 PM.

A weak trough dropping into the region by Wednesday put an end to
the offshore flow by Tuesday, supporting northwest to onshore 
flow and possible return of night to morning low clouds into
Wednesday. Another inside slider trough could support gusty 
offshore winds to some areas Thursday or Friday.

&&

.SHORT TERM (TDY-WED)...23/213 PM.

Some pockets of fair weather cumulus have lingered mainly across
the Los Angeles Basin early this afternoon despite moderate
offshore flow from the north and nearly neutral east/west
gradients. Daytime highs so far today are remarkably similar west
of the mountains with upper 60s to low 70s common. With a delayed
and weaker sea breeze than normal, we expect many areas to warm 
another degree or two before the day is out.

A bowling ball of a trough located over the Great Basin 
will slide just east of the Four Corners area into Monday. A modest 
1025+ mb surface high pressure will build in its wake across the 
Central Rockies, supporting moderate offshore flow (Los Angeles to 
Daggett pressure gradient peaking near -5 mb Monday morning). 
Associated cold air advection also supports the Frost Advisory which 
is in effect late tonight into early Monday morning for the Antelope 
Valley, especially along and west of Lancaster (not including 
Palmdale). This area is most likely to have winds drop off at times 
overnight, supporting the best radiational cooling conditions. In 
fact the latest HREF ensemble guidance indicates a 50 to 75 percent 
chance of frosty temperatures for this area with a 20 to 30 percent 
chance of briefing hitting the freezing mark. The good thermal 
support from the cold air advection increases the likelihood that 
gusty, advisory level winds will surface across typical mountains 
and valleys of Los Angeles/Ventura counties. The Malibu coast and 
inland coastal areas of Ventura county (such as Camarillo) may see 
advisory level wind gusts as well. With the good thermal advection, 
will add inland coastal areas of Ventura to the Wind Advisory, which 
expands into favored coastal/valley/Santa Monica mountains early 
Monday morning. Thermal support wanes quickly late Monday morning 
into the afternoon, so not only will this be a "one and done" Santa 
Ana event, but advisory level gusts for many areas may drop off by 
late morning. The brevity of the event also limits fire weather 
impacts somewhat (see fire weather discussion below for details).

A weak pop up ridge will support warming across the interior 
Tuesday. Onshore trends with actual onshore flow expected by 
Wednesday afternoon ahead of the next trough will support cooling
and moistening trends focused across coastal to valley areas 
during this time frame. The northwest to onshore pattern may 
support a weak eddy by Wednesday morning, which would increase the
chance of more widespread night to morning low clouds and fog 
redeveloping. Increasing southwest flow ahead of the next trough
may lead to slower than normal clearing of low clouds where they
do form.

.LONG TERM (THU-SUN)...23/213 PM.

About average confidence in the forecast Thursday into Friday. A
sharpening trough is expected to slide along or just east of the
area, dragging a dry cold front through the area followed by
another shot of gusty (but likely sub-advisory) northerly winds 
to typical mountain areas. If the trough makes a close pass, it
may be able to wring out patchy drizzle where marine layer clouds
exist, west of the mountains. A weak to moderate Santa Ana is 
possible into Friday, if thermal support is strong enough to 
overcome the marine inversion west of the mountains.

Forecast confidence drops significantly into next weekend as
ensemble guidance (GEFS ECS GEPS) lacks agreement on the location
and strength of another trough within the progressive pattern. 
GEFS and ECS mean 500 mb pattern has shifted earlier and more 
pronounced with the trough feature, but the somewhat wetter 
operational EC solution remains a clear outlier, with only a 
handful of ensembles that indicate any precipitation across the 
region. Will continue to follow these trends, but for now sticking
with a dry forecast associated with yet another inside slider 
trough.

&&

.AVIATION...23/1743Z.

At 1724Z, there was no marine inversion at KLAX. However, there 
was some remnant moisture up to 5000 feet. 

Overall, moderate to high confidence in 18Z TAF package. Aside
from SCT/LCL BKN skies in eastern LA county early in the period, 
CAVU conditions are anticipated for all sites.

Later in the TAF period, developing offshore flow may generate 
some LLWS/Turbulence, especially across the mountains and 
foothills, generally after 02Z. 

KLAX...High confidence in 18Z TAF. CAVU conditions expected
through the period. East winds are possible at the airfield after
10z, generally below 8 knots.
KBUR...High confidence in 18Z TAF. High confidence in CAVU 
conditions.

&&

.MARINE...23/105 PM.

No changes to the marine forecast in the afternoon issuance. 

For the Outer Waters, moderate to high confidence in current 
forecast. For today and tonight, moderate confidence in GALE 
FORCE winds across PZZ670/673 and Small Craft Advisory (SCA) level
winds across PZZ676. On Monday, high confidence in winds and seas
remaining below SCA levels for PZZ670/673, but there is a 40% 
chance of SCA level northeast winds across PZZ676. For Tuesday 
through Thursday, there is a 50-60% chance of SCA level winds. 

For the Inner Waters north of Point Sal, moderate confidence in 
current forecast. Today through tonight, high confidence in SCA 
level winds in the afternoon/evening hours and marginal SCA level 
seas. For Monday and Tuesday, high confidence in winds and seas 
remaining below SCA levels. On Wednesday, there is a 50% chance of
SCA level winds in the afternoon and evening hours. On Thursday, 
high confidence in winds and seas remaining below SCA levels. 

For the Inner Waters south of Point Conception, moderate to high
confidence in current forecast. Today and tonight, high confidence
in SCA level winds across the western half of the Santa Barbara
Channel with conditions below SCA levels elsewhere. On Monday,
there is a 50% chance of SCA level northeast winds from Point Mugu
to Santa Monica. For Monday night through Tuesday night, high
confidence in winds and seas remaining below SCA levels. On
Wednesday, there is a 40-50% chance of SCA level winds across
western sections. On Thursday, high confidence winds and seas
remaining below SCA levels.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...23/215 PM.

Gusty northerly winds will continue across portions of southwestern 
California through this evening, with gusts generally between 25 and 45 
mph across the mountains, southern Santa Barbara county, Santa Clarita 
Valley, and San Fernando Valley. The above areas that see northerly 
winds will experience a drying trend, with humidities lowering to 
between 15 and 30 percent this afternoon, resulting in elevated fire 
weather conditions that should persist through early this evening.

The flow will shift to the northeast tonight and Monday across Los 
Angeles and Ventura counties, resulting in the first Santa Ana wind 
event of the season. Gusts between 25 and 45 mph are expected across the
typical wind prone areas of Los Angeles and eastern Ventura counties, 
with isolated gusts as high as 50 mph possible in the Los Angeles county
mountains. The offshore winds are also expected to reach wind prone 
coastal areas of Ventura county and Malibu late tonight into Monday 
morning. The winds are forecast to then diminish rather quickly mid to 
late Monday afternoon. Humidities will lower further on Monday with 
minimums between 8 and 20 percent. As a result, elevated to brief 
critical fire weather conditions can be expected across much of Los 
Angeles and Ventura counties tonight into Monday, with the worst 
conditions from mid Monday morning to early Monday afternoon. While 
there is about a 20 to 30 percent chance for a Red Flag Warning, the 
brevity of the critical wind and humidity combination are limiting 
factors to consider. Winds will be weaker Monday night and 
Tuesday morning.

&&

.LOX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CA...Wind Advisory in effect until 3 PM PDT Monday for zones
      53-54. (See LAXNPWLOX).
     Frost Advisory in effect from 3 AM to 9 AM PDT Monday for
      zones 59-343-344. (See LAXNPWLOX).
     Wind Advisory in effect from 3 AM to 3 PM PDT Monday for
      zones 88-355-358-359-362-363-547. (See LAXNPWLOX).
     Wind Advisory in effect until 6 AM PDT Monday for zones
      349-351>353. (See LAXNPWLOX).
PZ...Small Craft Advisory in effect until 3 AM PDT Monday for
      zones 645-650-676. (See LAXMWWLOX).
     Gale Warning in effect until 3 AM PDT Monday for zones
      670-673. (See LAXMWWLOX).

&&

$$

PUBLIC...Munroe
AVIATION...Sweet/RAT
MARINE...Sweet/RAT
FIRE...Sirard
SYNOPSIS...Munroe

weather.gov/losangeles

Experimental Graphical Hazardous Weather Outlook at:
https://www.weather.gov/erh/ghwo?wfo=lox
