FXUS66 KSGX 232005
AFDSGX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service San Diego CA
107 PM PDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
The weather system that produced our strong onshore flow, and 
consequent showers overnight, will move east on Monday, setting us 
up for a brief bout of Santa Ana winds. Strongest winds will be on 
Monday morning below the Cajon Pass, and over the Santa Ana 
Mountains. Onshore flow will slowly rebuild the marine layer inland 
through midweek, along with fair and seasonally cool weather. Quiet 
weather is favored to continue into next weekend as well.


.DISCUSSION...FOR EXTREME SOUTHWESTERN CALIFORNIA INCLUDING ORANGE...
SAN DIEGO...WESTERN RIVERSIDE AND SOUTHWESTERN SAN BERNARDINO
COUNTIES...

Cumulus of fair weather were holding on in a good chunk of the 
coastal basin early this afternoon Farther inland though, skies 
were mostly clear over the higher mts/deserts. the westerly winds 
have dropped off considerably from this morning, and we are already 
seeing a turn from the north in our northern areas.

The strong short-wave over the Great Basin continues to dig SE, and 
will be moving over AZ on Monday. This will allow surface high 
pressure to build over the Great Basin and give us a shot of Santa 
Ana winds starting late evening, and continuing through Monday 
morning. A Wind Advisory has been posted for Northeast winds of 25 
to 35 MPH with gusts of 45 to near 55 MPH, in and below the more 
wind-prone pass and canyon areas of San Bernardino, Riverside and 
Orange Counties. San Diego County will get some of this wind, but 
the bulk of it should be below Advisory criteria. The winds will die 
off on Monday afternoon. 

Skies will be sunny on Monday, and it will be significantly warmer 
over coastal areas, especially O.C. with some east winds, but 
inland areas will remain cool. The marine layer should be pretty 
well scoured out on Monday, and won't really come back inland until 
Tuesday afternoon. Skies will remain clear tonight and Monday night 
into Tuesday morning, so expect much cooler nights without the cloud 
blanket overnight and much drier air in place. With full sunshine 
though, it will warm back up into the 70s on Tuesday. It will be 
noticeably warmer farther inland as well on Tuesday. 

The weather pattern for the remainder of the week will be rather 
benign as a series of weaker waves move through the westerlies 
farther to the north. We could get more brief bouts of weak offshore 
flow, but it will only serve to minimize the marine layer affects 
over the coastal basin. Daytime temperatures will be below average 
most days, and no precipitation is expected through next weekend. 

&&

.AVIATION... 
232000Z...Coast/Valleys...SCT-BKN clouds 3500-5500 ft MSL in the 
coastal basin will gradually clear into this evening. N to NE winds 
are expected to increase after 06Z Mon in the Inland Empire and 
Orange County. Peak wind gusts of 25-35 kt, locally up to 45 kt near 
passes. Areas of LLWS possible at KSNA, KONT, and KSBD through 17Z 
Mon. 

Mountains...FEW-SCT clouds 5000-10000 ft MSL through tonight. Areas 
of N to NE winds over the mountains and coastal mountain slopes 
after 03Z Mon with gusts 35-50 kt. Areas of MOD-SVR up/downdrafts 
and LLWS over/west mtns possible. Winds will weaken through 00Z Tue. 

Deserts... Mostly clear skies into Monday. Gusty N-NW winds with 
gusts of 25-40+ kt 03Z-16Z Mon. 

&&

.MARINE...
Periods of northeasterly winds could reach portions of the inner 
coastal waters Monday morning. Winds will turn back onshore by 
Tuesday. Periods of west winds with gusts near 20 kt in the outer 
coastal waters possible Wednesday evening into Thursday. 

&&

.BEACHES...
A long-period south-southwest swell from 190 degrees and a northwest 
swell from 280 degrees will generate elevated to high surf through 
Tuesday morning. Surf of 5-7 feet is expected in Orange County with 
surf of 4-6 feet in San Diego County. Surf will be highest on south 
facing beaches. Strong rip and longshore currents are expected, 
resulting in hazardous swimming conditions. Elevated surf will 
subside through Tuesday morning.


&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Tonight and Monday...A period of Santa Ana winds will impact areas 
in and below the major desert passes, the coastal slopes of the 
San Bernardino Mountains into the Inland Empire, and the Santa Ana 
Mountains. Strongest winds will be Monday morning. Wind gusts of 25-
35 MPH will be common, while peak gusts of 50-55 MPH are possible in 
the most offshore wind-prone locations of San Bernardino and 
Riverside Counties. East winds will also impact San Diego County, 
strongest across the far south, where local gusts of 40-50 MPH are 
possible. RH will lower to 10-20% on Monday. Fire weather conditions 
will be elevated on Monday in the windier pass areas, and could even 
be briefly critical around midday, where little to no rain has 
fallen. Winds will weaken on Monday afternoon, and good RH recovery 
is expected for Monday night, with further recovery on Tuesday.

&&

.SGX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
CA...Beach Hazards Statement through Tuesday morning for Orange 
     County Coastal Areas-San Diego County Coastal Areas.

PZ...None.

&&

$$

PUBLIC/FIRE WEATHER...10 
AVIATION/MARINE/BEACHES...CO
