FXUS66 KSTO 232043
AFDSTO

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Sacramento CA
143 PM PDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SYNOPSIS... 
Continued cooler temperatures with dry north to east winds. 
Slight warming for Monday then cooler mid week. Light 
precipitation chances returning to mainly the mountains and 
foothills Monday night through Wednesday.

&&

.DISCUSSION...
Breezy to locally windy conditions in the valley today with 
northerly winds mainly gusting in the 25 to 35 mph range. The 
winds will slacken this evening to a light northerly flow 
overnight and some areas becoming calm. This will lead to cooler
morning lows for Monday in the low to mid 40s for the valley. In 
the mountains northeast to southwest gradient will increase 
producing gusts in the 40 to 50 mph range in the mountains for the
favored locations.

A brief ridge will be building over the region for Monday with a 
slight warming trend. Light northerly flow is expected early on 
Monday before the flow reverses. Late Monday/Monday night a weak 
wave will move across the far north and may bring a few showers to
Shasta County with the remaining areas to the south staying dry.
The wave gets stretched out over the region on Tuesday with some
models trying to produce some light precipitation mainly over the
mountains and possibly in the northern and central portions of the
Sacramento valley. Tuesday night into Wednesday another shortwave 
will move over the region. Again this is looking very dry but may
produce some showers with its passage. Winds do not seem to be as
strong as today with these two weak systems.

&&
.EXTENDED DISCUSSION (Thursday THROUGH Sunday)...

Dry weather expected Thursday as high pressure builds back behind
the low. Model differences continue towards the end of the week 
with NBM/EC still showing wetter short wave trough spreading 
precipitation into the CWA Friday night through Sunday while the 
GFS is mainly dry with the shortwave. Uncertainty remains high
during that time period but should at least keep temperatures
cooler.

&&

.AVIATION...


VFR conditions expected for the next 24 hours with gusty winds the main
focus of the period. In the Central Valley and Delta area, N winds
up to 20 knots with local gusts to 30 knots thru 03Z. Over the mountains,
NE to E wind gusts up to 40 knots after 00Z. Lighter winds after 12Z
as high pressure briefly returns over NorCal.

&&

.STO WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
None.
&&

$$
