FXUS66 KPQR 212300
AFDPQR

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Portland OR
359 PM PDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...A frontal system is sweeping across the Pac NW this 
afternoon and evening, bringing periods of moderate to heavy rain 
and locally breezy southwest winds. Snow levels will lower to the 
Cascade passes early Saturday with showers behind the front. Expect 
snow accumulating on the roads Saturday at Santiam and Willamette 
Passes with greater accumulations higher up. Thunderstorms become 
possible nearly everywhere as well on Saturday. Some clearing 
Saturday night may lead to the coolest night so far this season, 
with patchy frost possible for the outlying valleys. Sunday looks to 
be mostly dry as transient ridging moves across the region, then 
active weather looks likely to resume Monday and continue well into 
next week. 

&&

.SHORT TERM...Tonight through Sunday night: A very complex 
combination of events are encompassing the next 36 hours. The 
dominant feature is a deepening trough descending from the Alaska 
panhandle this afternoon which will eventually form into a closed 
low over the Great Basin by Sunday morning. Under the upper jet and 
associated baroclinic zone, a multi-lobed closed surface low is 
currently maturing off the coast west of Astoria to Hoquiam at this 
hour. Also along the baroclinic zone, the jet is carrying PW values 
nearing 1.50 inches. And finally, there are still bouts of lingering 
wildfire smoke across portions of the south Willamette Valley and 
eastward toward the crest. The westerly winds associated with the 
front should help scour out most of the remaining smoke for the 
south Valley. However, areas around Oakridge may only get brief 
relief as winds can prove difficult to surface along that stretch of 
terrain.

As the upper trough deepens tonight, the associated cold front will 
cross the area and carry a moderately strong westerly flow into the 
coast range and the Cascades. Rain over the last 6 hours has already 
totaled from just few hundredths on the leading edge along a line 
north of Albany to 0.15-0.25 inches from roughly Aurora northward. 
As the front continues to sag southward tonight, snow levels will 
fall to around 4000 feet. This is already showing up on the vertical 
profiler near Forks, WA with a 4500 foot snow level. 

Meanwhile, the surface low will continue to mature as it moves 
onshore the north Oregon coast this evening. This should further 
enhance the westerly flow, especially to it's south and then also it 
will enhance the orographic and perpendicular moisture flow to 35-45 
kts square into the Cascades. Hi-Res models from the morning runs 
latched on to this and have thus have a significant increase to the 
prefrontal rain rates across the Cedar Creek burned area for the 00-
06Z period. Am now expecting around 1 inch of total rain during the 
6 hour period but one of those models has nearly 2 inches which is 
not wholly unreasonable given the fickle nature of surface lows 
moving onshore. Unfortunately, we do not know much about which 
specific areas of the fire burned with sufficient intensity to 
produce hydrophobic conditions and thus, would be more likely to 
result in debris flows. As such, we are exercising an abundance of 
caution and have issued a Flash Flood Watch for the fire area and 
the immediate down stream areas to include Oakridge, Westfir, and 
the Highway 58 corridor. Please refer to our Flash Flood Watch for 
more specific details. 

The cold front will have dropped into southeastern Oregon by 
daybreak with plenty of shower activity continuing, especially 
across the Cascades under the lingering northwest flow. Prior shift 
issued a Winter Weather Advisory for snow from late tonight through 
Saturday evening. Total accumulations at Willamette Pass could hit 9 
inches, however, some of the initial snows will likely melt given 
the warmer sub-surface temperatures then the rest appear to be 
spread out over the following 12 hours. None of the 12 hour blocks 
covering this event really hit the 6 inches in 12 hours criteria and 
we fall short of the 12 inches in 24 hours threshold as well. This 
will be the first notable snow event of the fall though and 
certainly worth noting in that regard.

Additionally on Saturday, the cooling upper air mass will produce 
deeper convective potential with thunderstorms not out of the 
question. The main threat will likely occur over the ocean waters 
early Saturday then push inland for the afternoon and early evening 
hours. Cannot rule out an isolated strong storm given the deeper 
shear with potential to produce accumulating hail, especially at the 
coast. But confidence any specific storm attribute remains low to 
moderate given the subtle shifts that can happen in this pattern.

Saturday night will see short wave ridging push eastward behind the 
departing now upper low. Showers will taper off rather quickly by 
Sunday morning. If all this should happen fast enough before 
sunrise, then some areas will have concerns for black ice and/or 
frost, especially away from the main population centers. Sunday will 
then remain fairly nice with some afternoon fair weather cumulus, 
albeit chilly as compared to recent weeks. /JBonk  

.LONG TERM...Monday through Thursday: Previous discussion follows. 
Longer range forecast models and cluster analyses suggest a 
continuation of a cool and active weather pattern well into next 
week. Models vary on details and timing of individual disturbances, 
but the main message is that confidence is high that temps will 
remain cooler than average for mid to late October, with periods of 
rain as additional frontal systems swing through the region. Some of 
the wetter guidance is suggesting we may put a decent dent in our 
October rainfall deficits, but this will be large hill to climb. 

For the second night in a row, the 00z GFS, CMC, and ECMWF
deterministic runs all develop some form of strong frontal 
system offshore Tuesday, which could potentially be our first 
coastal high wind event of the season based on these models' early 
depiction of the system. A quick look at 00z ensemble members 
suggest these windier deterministic models still do not have much
support from their ensembles, with only about 10% showing something
similar. It is a bit odd to see such a consistent paradox between the
deterministic and ensemble runs. Anyway, with all the jet stream
energy involved, will need to keep a very close eye on the west
Pacific tropics the next several days as our strongest early season
storm systems often start out as West Pacific typhoons. Weagle

&&

.AVIATION...A cold front dropping towards the region will result
in a mix of MVFR and IFR conditions and steady rain late this
afternoon and evening. A surface low pressure developing along 
the front will move into northwest Oregon this evening and result
in a burst of stronger southerly winds south of its track while 
areas just north of the track will likely experience a period of 
moderate rainfall. As the front and low pressure slide east of 
the region late this evening, expect a cool and a conditionally 
unstable airmass to spread across the region. This will result in
primarily VFR conditions between approximately 06z Saturday and
00z Sunday. However, there will likely be sporadic dips into MVFR
thresholds near more persistent showers from time to time. There
is 20-30% chance of a thunderstorm impacting any given site along
the coast late tonight through Saturday and a 15-20% chance of a
thunderstorm impacting any given inland terminal between ~19z
Saturday and 01z Sunday. 

KPDX AND APPROACHES...Light to moderate rain will continue to 
bring a mixture of MVFR and IFR conditions to the terminal through
03-06z Saturday. As a cooler and more unstable atmosphere spread 
into the area, expect conditions to trend towards predominantly 
VFR conditions between 06z Saturday and 00z Sunday. There will 
still likely be sporadic dips into MVFR thresholds during that 
time, but they are unlikely to remain the dominant flight 
condition for an extended period of time. There is a 15-20% chance
of brief thunderstorm impacting the terminal between 19z Saturday
and 01z Sunday. /Neuman 


&&


.MARINE...A series of frontal storm systems passing through the
waters over the next few days will bring a rather abrupt
transition to a much more typical weather pattern for late
October. The first storm system is currently moving east-
southeastward towards the waters. A surface low pressure 
deepening to near 1000-1005mb is expected to make landfall near 
Cape Lookout/Cascade Head later this evening. This will result in 
a period of Small Craft Advisory level southerly wind gusts of 
30 kt to spread south of the low pressure track this evening. As
the storm system transitions inland, another period of gusty
northwest winds will spread across the waters. A few sporadic gale
gusts to 35 kt appear likely across portions of the northern 
outer waters, but these should remain isolated and sporadic enough
to not warrant a Gale Warning. Nonetheless, seas will be
particularly steep and peak near 15 ft across the outer waters
late tonight into Saturday. The current Hazardous Seas Warning
covers this well. As precipitation turns more showery behind the
front there will be a 20-30% chance for a thunderstorm just about
anywhere across the waters late tonight into Saturday. 

High pressure will then briefly build into the area late Saturday
night into Sunday and result in wind and seas subsiding. However,
the next storm system will result in winds and seas climbing back
into Small Craft Advisory thresholds Sunday night into Monday with
yet another storm system likely Tuesday into early Wednesday. The
active weather pattern appears likely to continue. /Neuman 


&&


.PQR WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...

OR...Flash Flood Watch through late tonight for Cascades in Lane 
     County.

     Winter Weather Advisory from 3 AM to 11 PM PDT Saturday for 
     Cascades in Lane County.

WA...None.
PZ...Small Craft Advisory from 6 AM Saturday to 6 AM PDT Sunday for 
     Columbia River Bar.

     Small Craft Advisory from 7 PM this evening to 2 PM PDT Sunday 
     for coastal waters from Cape Shoalwater WA to Florence OR 
     out 10 nm.

     Small Craft Advisory until 2 AM PDT Saturday for coastal waters 
     from Cape Shoalwater WA to Florence OR from 10 to 60 nm.

     Hazardous Seas Warning from 2 AM Saturday to 2 AM PDT Sunday for 
     coastal waters from Cape Shoalwater WA to Florence OR from 
     10 to 60 nm.
&&

$$

www.weather.gov/portland

Interact with us via social media:
www.facebook.com/NWSPortland
www.twitter.com/NWSPortland
