FLUS45 KRIW 232129
HWORIW

Hazardous Weather Outlook
National Weather Service Riverton WY
329 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

WYZ001>020-022>030-242130-
Yellowstone National Park-Absaroka Mountains-Cody Foothills-
North Big Horn Basin-Southwest Big Horn Basin-
Southeast Big Horn Basin-Owl Creek and Bridger Mountains-
Bighorn Mountains West-Bighorn Mountains Southeast-
Northeast Johnson County-Southeast Johnson County-
Teton and Gros Ventre Mountains-Jackson Hole-
Wind River Mountains West-Wind River Mountains East-
Upper Wind River Basin-Wind River Basin-Lander Foothills-
Green Mountains and Rattlesnake Range-
Natrona County Lower Elevations-Casper Mountain-Star Valley-
Salt River and Wyoming Ranges-Upper Green River Basin Foothills-
Upper Green River Basin-South Lincoln County-
Rock Springs and Green River-Flaming Gorge-East Sweetwater County-
329 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

...Multiple Winter Weather Highlights through Monday Morning...

This Hazardous Weather Outlook is for Western and Central
Wyoming.

.DAY ONE...This Afternoon and Tonight.

Widespread snow continuing for portions of central Wyoming east of
the Divide, with snow showers west of the Divide through sunset.

Minor accumulations expected for most lower elevation locations.  
Snow will end from west to east overnight, ending in the east by 
late Monday morning.

North to northwest winds, with gusts of 45 to 55 mph, will occur 
across the Bighorn Basin and Johnson county. 

.DAYS TWO THROUGH SEVEN...Monday through Saturday.

Monday into Monday Night...Strong and gusty west winds with 40 to
50 mph gusts are likely in the lee of the Absaroka mountains, 
including locations such as Cody and Clark.

Monday Night and Tuesday...Light to moderate snow expected over
the western mountain ranges. 

Wednesday into Thursday...Light to moderate snow expected over 
western and southwestern portions of the state.

.SPOTTER INFORMATION STATEMENT...

Weather spotters are encouraged to report snowfall totals and any
wind damages according to standard operating procedures.

$$
