FXUS65 KCYS 231655
AFDCYS

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Cheyenne WY
1055 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(Today through Tuesday)
Issued at 315 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

An expansive upper level low pressure trough dominated the western
CONUS. A cold front extended from east-central through south-central
WY, northwest CO and southeast UT. A strong southwesterly flow aloft
advected moisture from the Four Corners into the northern Rockies/High
Plains. Regional radars detected scattered to numerous showers, mainly
in the form of snow from eastern UT/western CO into central/southern
WY. WYDOT webcams showed light to moderate snow falling along I-80
between Laramie and Rawlins with visibility as low as a mile. With
the recent warm temperatures, snow was melting on the roadways and
accumulating on grassy surfaces. Temperatures east of the front were
in the 40s and 50s, with 30s to the west.

The models are in good agreement advancing the cold front through
the CWA today. Rain/snow showers will be most numerous over southeast
WY and more scattered across the NE Panhandle. As the upper trough
moves into WY, jet energy aloft and orographic lift will enhance
snowfall above 8000 feet. Hourly snow rates of 1" to 2" will be 
possible, especially over the Sierra Madre Range. Outside the 
mountains, 2 to 6 inches will accumulate over the remainder of Carbon
County into southwest Albany County. Included the Upper North Platte
River basin zone (Saratoga) to the Winter Weather Advisory. All 
winter weather headlines will remain in effect through 6 AM Monday.
Thereafter, snow shower coverage will taper off into Monday afternoon.

High temperatures today will be dependent on the location of the
cold front, with 30s and 40s north and west, to the 50s and 60s east.
Lows tonight will range from the teens mountains, to the 20s and 
lower 30s elsewhere. 700mb temperatures hold steady around -10C 
Monday, yielding highs in the 30s and 40s with 20s mountains.

The upper trough pivots to the south and east over the Plains Monday,
followed by a shortwave upper ridge. The next shortwave quickly moves
into the northern Rockies by Monday evening. This system will intensify
the low level pressure/height gradients across southeast WY. Westerly
700-800mb flow will increase to 50-55 kt over the wind-prone areas
by 00Z Tuesday. Both CAG-CPR and CAG-BRX 850mb gradients ramp up 
quickly, exceeding 60 mtrs after 15Z Monday, and peaking between 85
and 105 mtrs around 06Z Tuesday. Decided to issue a High Wind Watch
for Arlington/Elk Mountain, I-80 Summit and Bordeaux from 9 AM Monday
through Noon Tuesday. It will be somewhat milder Tuesday as 700mb
temperatures moderate to -4C to -8C.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday night through Saturday)
Issued at 315 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The long term forecast remains on track with cooler temperatures, 
another round a precipitation, and a pleasant weekend.

Wednesday into Thursday, an upper-level trough will dig south from 
the Pacific Northwest into the Rockies. This will bring cooler 
temperatures and likely another round of snow for areas west of the 
Laramie Range. Prior to the front, orographic lift will likely 
promote some light snow showers over the mountains during the day 
Wednesday. The cold front looks to move through the CWA Wednesday 
night. This should lead to precipitation enhancement over the 
mountains with periods of moderate to heavy snow possible. Advisory 
level snow accumulations look probable during this time. Lower 
elevations could see some flakes fly, but not expecting much in the 
way of accumulation. Mountain snow showers will linger through the 
day on Thursday.

The cold front ushers in a brief period of much colder 700 mb air. 
700 mb temperatures on Wednesday range from -4C to -2C and drop to 
-10C on Thursday behind the front. High temperatures on Thursday 
for most locations will not make it out of the 40s. Frigid 
overnight temperatures also look likely Thursday night with lows 
in the 20s east of the Laramie Range and teens west of the Laramie
Range!

Friday through the weekend looks warmer and drier as a shallow 
ridge/zonal flow pattern persists. Temperatures will return to 
near-normal.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1052 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Low pressure moving through northern Colorado and southern Wyoming
this afternoon. Light snow showers west of KCYS will move out into
the Panhandle through late afternoon. Could see brief IFR
conditions at KCYS this afternoon as suggested by the HRRR. More
of an impact will be the strong winds in the Panhandle. These
winds may persist through the overnight hours out there.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 315 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

A cold front will move east through southeast Wyoming and the 
Nebraska Panhandle today. A strong upper level low pressure system
over the Intermountain West will progress eastward across the 
Rockies and High Plains through Monday. Abundant moisture, large 
scale lift and colder temperatures will produce widespread 
precipitation, with lower elevation rain showers and higher elevation
snow showers. Several inches of snow will accumulate above 8000 feet.
Milder and windy weather returns late Monday into Tuesday, followed
by cooler temperatures and chances for rain and snow Wednesday and
Thursday.

&&

.CYS WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
WY...Winter Weather Advisory until 6 AM MDT Monday for WYZ104-109>111-
     113-114.

     High Wind Watch from Monday morning through Tuesday morning for 
     WYZ106-110-116-117.

     Winter Storm Warning until 6 AM MDT Monday for WYZ112.

NE...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...MAJ
LONG TERM...SF
AVIATION...GCC
FIRE WEATHER...MAJ
