FXUS65 KCYS 232118
AFDCYS

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Cheyenne WY
318 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Tuesday)
Issued at 300 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The short term forecast package continues to have multiple weather
scenarios at play through Tuesday. GOES-16 Water Vapor satellite
imagery shows a large swath of moisture positioned from the Great
Basin into the Central and Northern Rockies region. H5 RAP 
analysis depicts a 545 dam ULL across northwest WY within a deep
longwave trough entrenched across the western half of the CONUS. 
We currently have a strong surface cold front pushing south and 
east from our cwa, with light rain showers spreading east of the 
Laramie Range/I-25 corridor, and light snow showers across the 
higher terrain, and additional areas west of the Laramie Range. 
Gusty winds behind the cold FROPA have been present for a majority
of the cwa, especially the NE Panhandle where gusts in excess of 
35-45mph have been observed for a large portion of the day.
Temperatures have been slow to decrease behind the cold front, but
there is still a large temperature gradient from our westernmost 
and easternmost areas of the I-80 corridor as KSNY resides at 65
degrees F, and KRWL is presently at 34 degrees F as of 21Z. 
SNOTEL observations have melted SWE values up to 0.6 inches for 
the Sage Creek area of Carbon County thus far, so we are certainly
seeing snowfall accumulation.

As we continue to the remainder of today and tonight, snow showers
will linger across the area, with temperatures decreasing as well.
Have maintained the winter headlines as the impacts associated
with the cold temperatures and snow showers will remain hazardous
through Monday morning per the latest model guidance. The other
important point to mention is that as the lee-side cyclogenesis
continues to occur the next 12-24 hours across the Central Plains,
the baroclinic weather system will deepen another 3-5mb. This will
result in a strong winds at the surface due to a 60+ LLJ setting
up across the Central Plains overnight. Winds at approximately
750-850mb will intensify over SD and NE to approximately 50-60
knots. Omega fields do show subsidence fields being present, with
this being realized as wind gusts up to 45-55mph across our
northern forecast zones of Niobrara, Sioux, Box Butte, and Dawes
County at times.

Monday will see the potent weather system move out of the area,
but lingering snow showers across the higher terrain of the
northern Laramie Range, and Snowy/Sierra Madre Range persist due
to strong winds and orographic enhancement. Went with an upgrade
to the Arlington forecast zone for a High Wind Warning on Monday
into Tuesday morning. There is certainly the signal for another
mountain wave to take place as another shortwave approaches from
the Pacific Northwest into the Northern Rockies. Subsidence will
spread from the wind prone corridors into zones further to the
east late Monday into Tuesday morning. Have expanded the High Wind
Watches as wind gusts to 60+ mph are possible for those regions
into Central Laramie County and eastern Platte County.
Temperatures will remain below normal through Tuesday, but
localized downslope effects from west to northwest winds off the
foothills will result in warmer temperatures by up to 5 degrees
for areas that have a High Wind Watch present. Expect that with
the approaching shortwave disturbance by Tuesday afternoon, our
western forecast zones will see the potential for light snow
showers with the potential for snowfall accumulation once again. 



.LONG TERM...(Tuesday night through Sunday)
Issued at 300 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Active in the Long Term with precip and winds the forecast
challenges.

Departing upper shortwave across South Dakota Tuesday evening
should keep winds elevated somewhat for a time Tuesday evening.
Did go a little above NBM guidance on winds. Persisting showers in
the mountains overnight. Could see a more widespread area of
showers Wednesday as cold front waves a little north out of
northern Colorado. Surface front continues to move north through
the day Wednesday with small chances for showers spreading north.

Next shortwave moves into western Wyoming Wednesday night into
Thursday. Craig to Casper 850/700mb height gradients Thursday
afternoon into the evening hours as this next low approaches.
Could see high wind criteria during that time as gradients climb
above 60mtrs at 850mb. GFS 700mb winds not that impressive on
winds...so confidence on the low side that this will happen.

It will be cold mid week on through the end of the week as 700mb
temperatures of -7 to -10C over much of the CWA. Upper ridge
begins to move over the CWA Friday with 700mb temperatures climb
back to freezing Friday morning through the afternoon. Looks to be
windy Friday into Saturday as ridge axis shifts east into Nebraska
and South Dakota.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1052 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Low pressure moving through northern Colorado and southern Wyoming
this afternoon. Light snow showers west of KCYS will move out into
the Panhandle through late afternoon. Could see brief IFR
conditions at KCYS this afternoon as suggested by the HRRR. More
of an impact will be the strong winds in the Panhandle. These
winds may persist through the overnight hours out there.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued at 300 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Fire weather concerns will remain low for the next several days as 
below normal temperatures and multiple chances for precipitation are
favored for the FWZs across southeast Wyoming and the Nebraska 
Panhandle.

&&

.CYS WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
WY...Winter Weather Advisory until 6 AM MDT Monday for WYZ104-109>111-
     113-114.

     High Wind Watch from Monday afternoon through Tuesday morning 
     for WYZ106-116.

     High Wind Watch from Monday evening through Tuesday morning for 
     WYZ107-117-118.

     High Wind Warning from 9 AM Monday to 9 AM MDT Tuesday for 
     WYZ110.

     Winter Storm Warning until 6 AM MDT Monday for WYZ112.

NE...None.
&&

$$

SHORT TERM...BW
LONG TERM...GCC
AVIATION...GCC
FIRE WEATHER...BW
