FXUS65 KRIW 232118
AFDRIW

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Riverton WY
318 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.SHORT TERM...(This evening through Monday night)
Issued at 312 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The longwave trough that brought a widespread taste of winter 
will linger in the region through tomorrow morning. Widespread 
snow will continue for many areas east of the Continental Divide 
this afternoon into tonight, whereas snow west of the Divide will 
be more showery in nature - mainly driven by cold air aloft 
promoting shallow convection. Current Winter Storm Warnings over 
the western Wyoming ranges end around sunset this evening, while 
the Winter Weather Advisories east of the Divide continue 
overnight.

A couple areas of continued winter weather concern include the 
southern Bighorn Mountains and northern Johnson County. Both of 
these locations will see winds increase this evening with blowing 
snow possible. Travel over Bighorn Mountain passes (such as Powder
River Pass and Granite Pass) is expected to be difficult thanks 
to gusty winds and heavy snow. Meanwhile, Johnson county is not 
expected to receive much additional snow, but any that does fall 
is likely to be blown by northerly gusts of 45 to 55 mph and could
lead to lower visibility. Watch out for strong cross-winds if 
traveling on west-to-east routes such as I-90 east of Buffalo, WY.

Snow tapers off quickly east of the Divide after sunrise Monday. 
Much cooler air will be in place, with afternoon highs in the 
upper 30s to mid 40s for lower elevations. The Absaroka Foothills 
west of Meeteetse and Cody are likely to see gusty afternoon winds
of 45 to 55 mph as the pressure gradient tightens ahead of the 
next weather system. These winds persist into Monday night.

.LONG TERM...(Tuesday through Sunday)
Issued at 312 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Two more weather systems are expected to bring rounds of snow for
some this week. The first is Monday night into Tuesday, and 
mainly looks to affect western Wyoming mountains. This is a quick-
moving shortwave, but may bring appreciable accumulations to the 
high terrain and light amounts to the valleys. The second system 
is a deeper wave that also looks to mainly affect the western 
ranges. Currently models have the bulk of the forcing with this
system moving to the southwest of Wyoming, but this system will 
be monitored closely as we approach the timeframe. Both systems 
will bring additional windy days to the region. 

Temperature-wise, the week ahead will be much colder than recent 
weeks; however, it will only be about 10 degrees cooler than 
seasonal normals.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1151 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Snow showers will continue, especially across eastern portions of
the area. This will produce lower ceilings and visibility at 
times through tonight. A gusty north to northwest wind will occur 
at most terminals through tonight. Snow will decrease after 06Z 
from east to west, ending across the east by 15Z Monday. Skies 
will clear through Monday morning. 

Please see the Aviation Weather Center and/or CWSU ZDV and ZLC 
for the latest information on icing and turbulence forecasts.


&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued AT 312 PM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Most mid-slope and high terrain areas have received significant 
snowfall, minimizing any fire weather concerns there. Widespread 
recent precipitation will also keep RHs elevated tonight and 
tomorrow, even for the lower elevations. Areas in the lee of 
Absarokas (Fire Weather Zone 276) will see strong and gusty winds 
Monday afternoon, along with RHs in the 30 percent range. 
Relatively light antecedent precipitation here will make it the 
area of greatest interest for fire weather potential on Monday;
however, even this is marginal.

&&

.RIW WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Storm Warning until 6 PM MDT this evening for WYZ002-012-
014.

Winter Weather Advisory until 6 AM MDT Monday for WYZ008-009-019-
022.

Winter Weather Advisory until 9 AM MDT Monday for WYZ010-011.

Winter Weather Advisory until 6 PM MDT this evening for WYZ015-
024-030.

&&

$$

SHORT TERM...VandenBoogart
LONG TERM...VandenBoogart
AVIATION...Myers
FIRE WEATHER...VandenBoogart
