FXUS65 KRIW 231751
AFDRIW

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Riverton WY
1151 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

.UPDATE...
Issued at 930 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

The forecast remains largely on track this morning, with 
widespread snow east of the Continental Divide, and scattered snow
showers west of the Divide. 

One addition this morning is Winter Weather Advisories for the 
lower elevations of Johnson County. There is not a lot of snow
forecast here, with only 1 to 3 inches currently expected; 
however, there is high confidence for 45 to 55 mph gusts this 
afternoon and into the overnight hours. The snow and wind is 
likely to cause difficult travel and lowered visibility, as well
as strong cross-winds along west-to-east oriented roads, such as 
I-90 east of Buffalo. Thankfully the snow will be fairly wet and 
dense for this event, somewhat mitigating blowing snow issues. 
Morning runs of the high-resolution models also show some 
possibility for a period of enhanced snowfall rates overnight as 
the jet on the upstream side of the trough moves eastward across 
Wyoming. For the aforementioned reasons, an expansion of the 
ongoing Winter Weather Advisory seemed prudent.

&&

.SHORT TERM...Today through Monday
Issued at 215 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Precipitation will continue to fill in east of the Divide early this 
morning, as the cold front exits the CWA into eastern WY before 
sunrise. Rain and/or snow will be widespread across most of the CWA 
by 12Z this morning. Rain will gradually change over to snow for 
most areas east of the Divide today. Any snowfall accumulations east 
of the Divide will likely only occur in grassy areas through the day 
today, as sfc temperatures are expected to remain above freezing and 
the sun angle is still relatively high. The exception will be along 
Hwy 287/789 near Jeffrey City and Beaver Rim. Have added a Winter 
Weather Advisory for this area for 2 to 4 inches expected today and 
tonight. Leeside cyclogenesis will continue to develop over the High 
Plains/NE Panhandle area this morning. This intensifying sfc low 
will tighten the pressure gradient over the forecast area today. 
Accordingly, this will result in north to northwest winds, with 
gusts of 35 to 45 mph, over northern portions, the Green River Basin 
and Sweetwater County. Wind gusts of 20 to 25 mph will occur 
elsewhere through the day today. 

The best chances for snow will be east of the Divide after 00Z this 
evening, as the storm system moves over the Northern Plains toward 
the Upper Midwest. Northwest winds, with gusts of 40 to 50 mph, will 
continue over the Bighorn Basin, northern Johnson County and the 
southern end of the Bighorns and Bridger Mountains. Snow will 
gradually end from west to east through the night tonight, with 
lingering snow finally ending over portions of Johnson and Natrona 
counties after sunrise Monday morning. Gusty west to northwest winds 
will continue over wind prone locations Monday, as a shortwave ridge 
builds over the region in the wake of this storm. Colder than normal 
temperatures will remain in place Monday, with readings in the 40s 
for much of the area.

.LONG TERM...Monday night through Saturday
Issued at 215 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Monday night brings a shortwave originating from the Pacific 
Northwest down to Wyoming. This disturbance will be enough for light 
to moderate snowfall chances for western Wyoming, with some small 
snow chances in the Bighorn Mountains as well. Timing looks to be 
fairly consistent amongst models, with snow chances beginning in the 
west by around midnight. Most snow chances look to drop off by noon 
Tuesday, as the shortwave moves out. Currently, highest snowfall 
amounts look to be in the Teton County area, with about 2.5 to 3.0 
inches in Jackson Valley, with higher values in the surrounding 
mountains. Winds will also pick up during the passage of this 
shortwave, producing breezy to windy conditions overnight for 
western and southern portions of the area. Gusts up to 40 mph 
possible for the Wind Corridor.

Another trough moves into the area Wednesday/Thursday. This system 
looks to be more impressive than the one Monday night. As of now, 
western and southern portions of the area have the best chances for 
snow, but this system is fairly far out and models currently have 
the low evolving in different ways. Temperatures remain quite cool 
through the work week. Warmer and drier conditions for Friday and 
Saturday as the area clears out, and a ridge builds in.

&&

.AVIATION...(For the 18Z TAFS through 18Z Monday afternoon)
Issued at 1151 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Snow showers will continue, especially across eastern portions of 
the area. This will produce lower ceilings and visibility at times 
through tonight. A gusty north to northwest wind will occur at most 
terminals through tonight. Snow will decrease after 06Z from east to 
west, ending across the east by 15Z Monday. Skies will clear through 
Monday morning. 

Please see the Aviation Weather Center and/or CWSU ZDV and ZLC for 
the latest information on icing and turbulence forecasts.

&&

.FIRE WEATHER...
Issued AT 215 AM MDT Sun Oct 23 2022

Light snow expected across much of the forecast area today. Any
accumulations in the lower elevations east of the Divide will
likely only occur in grassy areas during the day today. North to
northwest winds, with gusts of 40 to 50 mph, will occur today and
tonight through the Bighorn Basin and zones
277/278/279/281/285/287. Precipitation will end from west to east
tonight, with dry conditions expected after sunrise Monday 
morning. Below normal temperatures will remain in place Monday, as
light snow returns over northwestern portions Monday night into
Tuesday. 

&&

.RIW WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
Winter Storm Warning until 6 PM MDT this evening for WYZ002-012-
014.

Winter Weather Advisory until 6 AM MDT Monday for WYZ008-009-019-
022.

Winter Weather Advisory until 9 AM MDT Monday for WYZ010-011.

Winter Weather Advisory until 6 PM MDT this evening for WYZ015-
024-030.

&&

$$

UPDATE...VandenBoogart
SHORT TERM...LaVoie
LONG TERM...Wittmann
AVIATION...Myers
FIRE WEATHER...LaVoie
