FXUS61 KPHI 220200
AFDPHI

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Mount Holly NJ
1000 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure over the region will result in dry conditions,
clear skies and moderating temperatures through Saturday.
Saturday night through Monday, a low pressure will move
northward off the coast, spreading clouds and potentially some
rain across the region. A lingering frontal boundary in its wake
may keep some clouds and showers around into the middle of next
week.

&&

.NEAR TERM /THROUGH SATURDAY/...
The forecast is running on track this evening, as there isn't
much to really consider adjusting other than the temperatures.
In that case we did tweak low temperatures down slightly.
Temperatures today generally ran 4 to 7 degrees warmer than 
Thursday. We decided not to translate that directly down to the 
low temperatures, as the airmass remains every bit as dry, with 
similar dewpoint temperatures to last night. Over the last few
hours, temperature departures compared to the same hour on
Thursday have decreased, so it is clear that dry air is still
allowing for good radiational cooling, along with calm winds 
and clear skies. That said, all that change did was to allow 
for some patchy frost in areas of eastern PA and northwest NJ 
where the growing season has already ended. The exception might 
be around Mercer and Middlesex counties, where some patchy frost
will be possible, but did not see enough coverage to justify a 
Frost Advisory. Eastern Burlington and of course the pine 
barrens will also flirt with frosty temps once again. 

Saturday, the ridge remains in place over our region, leading 
to another rain-free day. Some high clouds will begin to 
increase in the afternoon from the south and east. Thanks to 
some weak southwesterly flow, we may see a modest warming trend,
with highs around 5 degrees higher than today, in the 60s 
across the region.

&&

.SHORT TERM /SATURDAY NIGHT THROUGH MONDAY/...
Clarity is slowly increasing regarding the coastal low pressure
expected to move northward along the coast during this period,
though some uncertainty remains. We do have reasonable
confidence that a low will move northward across the western
Atlantic, passing the CWA Sunday into Sunday night and departing
northeastwards while weakening on Monday. The uncertainty
remains regarding just how far west the track will take the low
and consequently, how far west rainfall with the low pressure
will reach. GFS remains the easternmost and driest, with
essentially no rain across the region, while ECMWF remains the
westernmost and wettest, with rain overspreading the entire
region Sunday. For now have placed increasing pops from south to
north Saturday night through Sunday afternoon, when they peak,
with chance pops in our western zones and likely pops in our
central and eastern zones by this point. Thereafter, the low
pressure's departure and weakening results in pops lowering to
slight chance across most of the CWA by Monday afternoon. Even
in our wet scenarios, it looks likely that Saturday night and
Monday are generally dry, with the bulk of any precip now likely
to occur Sunday and Sunday night, with particular focus on
Sunday afternoon. We are reasonably confident, however, that
regardless of rainfall, clouds will dominate Sunday, which
likely holds temps significantly lower than Saturday, while lows
Saturday night and Sunday night will remain milder than recent
days thanks to clouds and onshore flow. With the system
departing and potential for clouds to break for some sun Monday,
along with the milder air mass moving in from the south in its
wake, highs likely approach or exceed 70 in much of the area
Monday.

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY NIGHT THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Model uncertainty increases as we head through the long term,
with the GFS and ECMWF essentially at complete odds by the end
of the forecast period. Both models suggest impulses in the 
mean upper flow will bring opportunities for showers, and the 
onshore flow may keep clouds around much of the time, but 
exactly when it will rain and just how warm we may get is 
extremely uncertain. What we do know, however, is that the 
coming week will be significantly milder than the prior week, 
with no risk of frost/freeze. Temperatures likely remain in the 
50s and 60s much of the time, and days where the sun shines for 
a few hours stand a good chance of 70s, but just what days that 
will be remains uncertain. Guidance has a marginal amount of 
agreement for a better chance of showers Wednesday, but 
certainly there is significant outliers in that potential.

&&

.AVIATION /02Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
The following discussion is for KPHL, KPNE, KTTN, KABE, 
KRDG, KILG, KMIV, KACY and surrounding areas.

Tonight...VFR. Calm winds. High confidence.

Saturday...VFR. Light winds. High confidence.

Outlook...

Saturday night...VFR. Winds NE 5 to 15 kt. Moderate confidence.

Sunday into Monday...High uncertainty in potential for sub-VFR
as a coastal low moving northward may spread rain and reduced
cigs/vsby inland. Best chance of deteriorating conditions is
along the coast at KACY, but a small potential exists even all
the way to KRDG. Winds will be east to northeast 5-15 kts, and
if the low tracks close enough, some gusts may push 25 kts
especially Sunday afternoon/evening. Low confidence.

Tuesday and Wednesday...Likely more predominant VFR, lingering
moisture from the coastal low combined with potential for
additional systems moving in from the west suggest high
uncertainty in the details. Winds likely remain generally east 
to northeast at 5-15 kts. Low confidence.

&&

.MARINE...
No marine hazards are expected through Saturday. South winds  
5-10 kts tending lighter southwesterly overnight. Seas around 2 
feet.

Saturday...Winds becoming easterly 5 to 10 knots. Seas 2 to 3
ft. 

Outlook...

Saturday night through Monday...Winds will be east to northeast,
but strength is uncertain. Coastal low passing to the east may
bring a period of SCA gusts, especially late Sunday/Sunday
night. Winds likely relax Monday as the low passes north.

Tuesday and Wednesday...Winds and seas should stay below SCA 
criteria.

&&

.PHI WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
PA...None.
NJ...None.
DE...None.
MD...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...Franklin/RCM
NEAR TERM...AAD/Franklin
SHORT TERM...RCM
LONG TERM...RCM
AVIATION...Franklin/RCM
MARINE...Franklin/RCM
