FXUS61 KLWX 220116
AFDLWX

Area Forecast Discussion
National Weather Service Baltimore MD/Washington DC
916 PM EDT Fri Oct 21 2022

.SYNOPSIS...
High pressure will remain nearby through Saturday. A coastal low
will track northward toward the area on Sunday, before
progressing off to our north and east early next week.
Thereafter, high pressure will build back into the region. A
frontal system is expected to cross through the Mid-Atlantic by
late Wednesday.

&&

.NEAR TERM /UNTIL 8 AM SATURDAY MORNING/...
As of this evening, multi-layered water vapor imagery and model
height fields depict a narrow mid/upper level trough trough
along the Eastern Seaboard. Farther upstream, predominantly 
zonal flow has set up across the remainder of the CONUS. Moving 
into the night, this mentioned trough axis will become 
increasingly displaced from the primary belt of westerlies 
situated over Canada. As a result, a closed upper low will start
to form off the southeastern U.S. coast later tonight. 

Winds will turn light again tonight, which along with clear 
skies will make conditions ideal for radiational cooling. 
Temperatures will drop back into the 30s for most, with 40s 
immediately along the bay and in the urban centers. Frost isn't 
expected tonight in areas where the growing season is still 
active, as temperatures will be a few degrees warmer than 
preceding nights.

&&

.SHORT TERM /8 AM SATURDAY MORNING THROUGH SUNDAY NIGHT/...
Upper level troughing will start to dig into the western CONUS
tomorrow, while the aforementioned upper low remains off the
southeast US coast and an associated coastal low starts to form.
High pressure will remain in control at the surface, leading to
sunny skies. High temperatures will be in the mid 60s to lower
70s for most.

The upper low and associated coastal low off the southeast US 
coast will start to feel the influence of the digging trough 
over the western US late tomorrow, and will start to be slowly 
drawn northward Saturday night into Sunday. This will result in
clouds overspreading the area from east to west later Saturday 
night into Sunday. Guidance still shows a fair amount of spread 
with respect to the track of this system, but a few showers 
can't be ruled out late Saturday night through the first half of
Sunday night. Far western portions of the forecast area should 
remain dry, with chances for rain increasing with eastward 
extent across the forecast area. High temperatures on Sunday 
should be in the 60s once again, with lows overnight Sunday 
night remaining a bit more mild with the cloud cover in place 
(lows in the mid 40s to mid 50s).

&&

.LONG TERM /MONDAY THROUGH FRIDAY/...
Dry conditions will persist through mid-week as high pressure 
remains in control. Temperatures Monday through Wednesday will 
max out in the low to mid 70s with overnight lows generally in the 
50s. While our area remains quiet during this time a deep upper 
trough will be developing across the central CONUS, which will 
gradually move east throughout the week. 

By Thursday, rain chances begin to increase as low pressure slides 
by well to our northwest with the attendant cold front sliding 
across our region. At this point this appears to be an uneventful 
frontal passage as the upper-level energy remains to the northwest. 
At any rate, high temperatures Thursday will again be into the mid 
70s ahead of the frontal passage.

&&

.AVIATION /01Z SATURDAY THROUGH WEDNESDAY/...
VFR conditions and light winds will continue through Saturday.
Sub-VFR conditions may be possible by Sunday as a coastal low
tracks northward toward the area. Uncertainty still remains high
with this system, but eastern terminals would have the greatest
chance of experiencing sub-VFR conditions.

VFR conditions are expected Monday and Tuesday. Some clouds may 
linger early Monday morning as a coastal low departs to the 
northwest, but should be gone fairly early in the day.

&&

.MARINE...
Light south to southeast winds are expected through the first
half of Saturday. Winds will turn easterly Saturday afternoon,
and then shift around to northerly Saturday night into Sunday. 
SCA conditions appear possible in northerly flow late Saturday 
night into Sunday.

Sub SCA criteria winds are likely early next week. Winds will shift 
from northerly to northeasterly Monday into Tuesday.

&&

.LWX WATCHES/WARNINGS/ADVISORIES...
DC...None.
MD...None.
VA...None.
WV...None.
MARINE...None.

&&

$$
SYNOPSIS...BRO/KJP
NEAR TERM...BRO/KJP
SHORT TERM...KJP
LONG TERM...CJL
AVIATION...CJL/KJP
MARINE...CJL/KJP
